Number:  1
UID:  27015590
Founded words:  ['activation', 'associated', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  Accumulating evidence suggested that soluble oligomeric β-amyloid protein (Aβ) exerts diverse roles in neuronal cell death, neuroinflammation, oxidative stress, and the eventual dementia associated with Alzheimer's disease (AD). Developing an agent with multiple properties may be a reasonable strategy for the treatment of AD. In this study, we isolated a novel multifunctional compound named camellikaempferoside B (YCF-2) from Fuzhuan brick tea. YCF-2 consists of kaempferol backbone, p-coumaric acid (p-CA) group, and a novel structure of rhamnopyranosyl group at the C-4' position, possessing the properties of both kaempferol and p-CA. YCF-2 significantly inhibited Aβ production by decreasing β-secretase activity. Moreover, YCF-2 suppressed Aβ42 fibrillation and facilitated nontoxic oligomer formation by binding to Aβ42 oligomers and by blocking the conformational transition to β-sheet. Furthermore, YCF-2 ameliorated Aβ-induced neuronal cell death, ROS production, inflammatory factor release, and microglia activation by blocking the NF-κB signaling pathway in microglia. These findings indicated that YCF-2 with a novel lead structure has potential applications for drug development for AD treatment.

Number:  2
UID:  26905811
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Targeting β-secretase (BACE1) with small-molecule inhibitors offers a promising route for treatment of Alzheimer's disease. However, the intricate pH dependence of BACE1 function and inhibitor efficacy has posed major challenges for structure-based drug design. Here we investigate two structurally similar BACE1 inhibitors that have dramatically different inhibitory activity using continuous constant pH molecular dynamics (CpHMD). At high pH, both inhibitors are stably bound to BACE1; however, within the enzyme active pH range, only the iminopyrimidinone-based inhibitor remains bound, while the aminothiazine-based inhibitor becomes partially dissociated following the loss of hydrogen bonding with the active site and change of the 10s loop conformation. The drastically lower activity of the second inhibitor is due to the protonation of a catalytic aspartate and the lack of a propyne tail. This work demonstrates that CpHMD can be used for screening pH-dependent binding profiles of small-molecule inhibitors, providing a new tool for structure-based drug design and optimization.

Number:  3
UID:  26890753
Founded words:  ['mediates']
Abstract:  A growing body of pathological, biomarker, genetic, and mechanistic data suggests that amyloid accumulation, as a result of changes in production, processing, and/or clearance of brain amyloid-β peptide (Aβ) concentrations, plays a key role in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Beta-secretase 1 (BACE1) mediates the first step in the processing of amyloid-β protein precursor (AβPP) to Aβ peptides, with the soluble N terminal fragment of AβPP (sAβPPβ) as a direct product, and BACE1 inhibition is an attractive target for therapeutic intervention to reduce the production of Aβ. Here, we report the in vitro and in vivo pharmacological profile of AZD3293, a potent, highly permeable, orally active, blood-brain barrier (BBB) penetrating, BACE1 inhibitor with unique slow off-rate kinetics. The in vitro potency of AZD3293 was demonstrated in several cellular models, including primary cortical neurons. In vivo in mice, guinea pigs, and dogs, AZD3293 displayed significant dose- and time-dependent reductions in plasma, cerebrospinal fluid, and brain concentrations of Aβ40, Aβ42, and sAβPPβ. The in vitro potency of AZD3293 in mouse and guinea pig primary cortical neuronal cells was correlated to the in vivo potency expressed as free AZD3293 concentrations in mouse and guinea pig brains. In mice and dogs, the slow off-rate from BACE1 may have translated into a prolongation of the observed effect beyond the turnover rate of Aβ. The preclinical data strongly support the clinical development of AZD3293, and patients with AD are currently being recruited into a combined Phase 2/3 study to test the disease-modifying properties of AZD3293.

Number:  4
UID:  26840340
Founded words:  ['associated']
Abstract:  Pancreatic amyloid formation by islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP) is a hallmark pathological feature of type 2 diabetes. IAPP is stored in the secretory granules of pancreatic beta-cells and co-secreted with insulin to maintain glucose homeostasis. IAPP is innocuous under homeostatic conditions but imbalances in production or processing of IAPP may result in homodimer formation leading to the rapid production of cytotoxic oligomers and amyloid fibrils. The consequence is beta-cell dysfunction and the accumulation of proteinaceous plaques in and around pancreatic islets. Beta-site APP-cleaving enzyme 2, BACE2, is an aspartyl protease commonly associated with BACE1, a related homolog responsible for amyloid processing in the brain and strongly implicated in Alzheimer's disease. Herein, we identify two distinct sites of the mature human IAPP sequence that are susceptible to BACE2-mediated proteolytic activity. The result of proteolysis is modulation of human IAPP fibrillation and human IAPP protein degradation. These results suggest a potential therapeutic role for BACE2 in type 2 diabetes-associated hyperamylinaemia.

Number:  5
UID:  26813690
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interactions', 'interactions', 'interacting', 'interactions', 'interactions', 'interactions', 'interacting', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complexes']
Abstract:  We report here two new small-size peptides acting as modulators of the β-site APP cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) exosite. Ac-YPYFDPL-NH2 and Ac-YPYDIPL-NH2 displayed a moderate but significant inhibitory effect on BACE1. These peptides were obtained from a molecular modeling study. By combining MD simulations with ab initio and DFT calculations, a simple and generally applicable procedure to evaluate the binding energies of small-size peptides interacting with the exosite of the BACE1 is reported here. The structural aspects obtained for the different complexes were analyzed providing a clear picture about the binding interactions of these peptides. These interactions have been investigated within the framework of the density functional theory and the quantum theory of atoms in molecules using a reduced model. Although the approach used here was traditionally applied to the study of noncovalent interactions in small molecules complexes in gas phase, we show, through in this work, that this methodology is also a very powerful tool for the study of biomolecular complexes, providing a very detailed description of the binding event of peptides modulators at the exosite of BACE1.

Number:  6
UID:  26696252
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  The multitarget approach has gained increasing acceptance as a useful tool to address complex and multifactorial maladies such as Alzheimer's disease (AD). The concurrent inhibition of the validated AD targets β-secretase (BACE-1) and glycogen synthase kinase-3β (GSK-3β) by attacking both β-amyloid and tau protein cascades has been identified as a promising AD therapeutic strategy. In our study, curcumin was identified as a lead compound for the simultaneous inhibition of both targets; therefore, synthetic efforts were dedicated to obtaining a small library of novel curcumin-based analogues, and a number of potent and balanced dual-target inhibitors were obtained. In particular, 2, 6, and 7 emerged as promising drug candidates endowed with neuroprotective potential and brain permeability. Notably, for some new compounds the symmetrical diketo and the β-keto-enol tautomeric forms were purposely isolated and tested in vitro, allowing us to gain insight into the key requirements for BACE-1 and GSK-3β inhibition.

Number:  7
UID:  26694839
Founded words:  ['interacted', 'association', 'interacted', 'complex', 'complex', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulated']
Abstract:  Many single-transmembrane proteins are sequentially cleaved by ectodomain-shedding α-secretases and the γ-secretase complex, a process called regulated intramembrane proteolysis (RIP). These cleavages are thought to be spatially and temporally separate. In contrast, we provide evidence for a hitherto unrecognized multiprotease complex containing both α- and γ-secretase. ADAM10 (A10), the principal neuronal α-secretase, interacted and cofractionated with γ-secretase endogenously in cells and mouse brain. A10 immunoprecipitation yielded γ-secretase proteolytic activity and vice versa. In agreement, superresolution microscopy showed that portions of A10 and γ-secretase colocalize. Moreover, multiple γ-secretase inhibitors significantly increased α-secretase processing (r = -0.86) and decreased β-secretase processing of β-amyloid precursor protein. Select members of the tetraspanin web were important both in the association between A10 and γ-secretase and the γ → α feedback mechanism. Portions of endogenous BACE1 coimmunoprecipitated with γ-secretase but not A10, suggesting that β- and α-secretases can form distinct complexes with γ-secretase. Thus, cells possess large multiprotease complexes capable of sequentially and efficiently processing transmembrane substrates through a spatially coordinated RIP mechanism.

Number:  8
UID:  26614409
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interactions']
Abstract:  BACE-1 (β-secretase) is considered to be one of the promising targets for treatment of Alzheimer's disease as it catalyzes the rate limiting step of Aβ-42 production. Herein, we report a novel class of allylidene hydrazinecarboximidamide derivatives as moderately potent BACE-1 inhibitors, having aminoguanidine substitution on allyl linker with two aromatic groups on either side. A library of derivatives was designed based on the docking studies, synthesized and evaluated for BACE-1 inhibition in vitro. The designed ligands displayed interactions with the catalytic aspartate dyad through guanidinium functionality. Further, the aromatic rings placed on either side of the linker occupied S1 and S3 active site regions contributing to the activity. These ligands were also predicted to follow Lipinski rule and cross blood brain barrier. Compound 2.21, having high docking score, was found to be most active with IC50 of 6.423μM indicating good correlation with docking prediction.

Number:  9
UID:  26574544
Founded words:  ['associated', 'regulated', 'regulated']
Abstract:  Numerous membrane-bound proteins undergo regulated intramembrane proteolysis. Regulated intramembrane proteolysis is initiated by shedding, and the remaining stubs are further processed by intramembrane-cleaving proteases (I-CLiPs). Neuregulin 1 type III (NRG1 type III) is a major physiological substrate of β-secretase (β-site amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1)). BACE1-mediated cleavage is required to allow signaling of NRG1 type III. Because of the hairpin nature of NRG1 type III, two membrane-bound stubs with a type 1 and a type 2 orientation are generated by proteolytic processing. We demonstrate that these stubs are substrates for three I-CLiPs. The type 1-oriented stub is further cleaved by γ-secretase at an ϵ-like site five amino acids N-terminal to the C-terminal membrane anchor and at a γ-like site in the middle of the transmembrane domain. The ϵ-cleavage site is only one amino acid N-terminal to a Val/Leu substitution associated with schizophrenia. The mutation reduces generation of the NRG1 type III β-peptide as well as reverses signaling. Moreover, it affects the cleavage precision of γ-secretase at the γ-site similar to certain Alzheimer disease-associated mutations within the amyloid precursor protein. The type 2-oriented membrane-retained stub of NRG1 type III is further processed by signal peptide peptidase-like proteases SPPL2a and SPPL2b. Expression of catalytically inactive aspartate mutations as well as treatment with 2,2'-(2-oxo-1,3-propanediyl)bis[(phenylmethoxy)carbonyl]-l-leucyl-l-leucinamide ketone inhibits formation of N-terminal intracellular domains and the corresponding secreted C-peptide. Thus, NRG1 type III is the first protein substrate that is not only cleaved by multiple sheddases but is also processed by three different I-CLiPs.

Number:  10
UID:  26465092
Founded words:  ['associated', 'functions', 'functions', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  Inhibition of BACE1 is being pursued as a therapeutic target to treat patients suffering from Alzheimer's disease because BACE1 is the sole β-secretase that generates β-amyloid peptide. Knowledge regarding other cellular functions of BACE1 is therefore critical for the safe use of BACE1 inhibitors in human patients. Neuregulin-1 (Nrg1) is a BACE1 substrate and BACE1 cleavage of Nrg1 is critical for signaling functions in myelination, remyelination, synaptic plasticity, normal psychiatric behaviors, and maintenance of muscle spindles. This review summarizes the most recent discoveries associated with BACE1-dependent Nrg1 signaling in these areas. This body of knowledge will help to provide guidance for preventing unwanted Nrg1-based side effects following BACE1 inhibition in humans. To initiate its signaling cascade, membrane anchored Neuregulin (Nrg), mainly type I and III β1 Nrg1 isoforms and Nrg3, requires ectodomain shedding. BACE1 is one of such indispensable sheddases to release the functional Nrg signaling fragment. The dependence of Nrg on the cleavage by BACE1 is best manifested by disrupting the critical role of Nrg in the control of axonal myelination, schizophrenic behaviors as well as the formation and maintenance of muscle spindles.

Number:  11
UID:  26454161
Founded words:  ['activation', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interacting', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interacting', 'complexes']
Abstract:  KCNQ1 (Kv7.1) proteins form a homotetrameric channel, which produces a voltage-dependent K(+) current. Co-assembly of KCNQ1 with the auxiliary β-subunit KCNE1 strongly up-regulates this current. In cardiac myocytes, KCNQ1/E1 complexes are thought to give rise to the delayed rectifier current IKs, which contributes to cardiac action potential repolarization. We report here that the type I membrane protein BACE1 (β-site APP-cleaving enzyme 1), which is best known for its detrimental role in Alzheimer's disease, but is also, as reported here, present in cardiac myocytes, serves as a novel interaction partner of KCNQ1. Using HEK293T cells as heterologous expression system to study the electrophysiological effects of BACE1 and KCNE1 on KCNQ1 in different combinations, our main findings were the following: (1) BACE1 slowed the inactivation of KCNQ1 current producing an increased initial response to depolarizing voltage steps. (2) Activation kinetics of KCNQ1/E1 currents were significantly slowed in the presence of co-expressed BACE1. (3) BACE1 impaired reconstituted cardiac IKs when cardiac action potentials were used as voltage commands, but interestingly augmented the IKs of ATP-deprived cells, suggesting that the effect of BACE1 depends on the metabolic state of the cell. (4) The electrophysiological effects of BACE1 on KCNQ1 reported here were independent of its enzymatic activity, as they were preserved when the proteolytically inactive variant BACE1 D289N was co-transfected in lieu of BACE1 or when BACE1-expressing cells were treated with the BACE1-inhibiting compound C3. (5) Co-immunoprecipitation and fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) supported our hypothesis that BACE1 modifies the biophysical properties of IKs by physically interacting with KCNQ1 in a β-subunit-like fashion. Strongly underscoring the functional significance of this interaction, we detected BACE1 in human iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes and murine cardiac tissue and observed decreased IKs in atrial cardiomyocytes of BACE1-deficient mice.

Number:  12
UID:  26427429
Founded words:  ['function', 'function']
Abstract:  It has long been established that β-Secretase (BACE) plays a critical role in the formation of amyloid plaques in Alzheimer's Disease patients, but it is only recently that the importance of β-secretases in retinal pathophysiology has been recognized. BACE expression is elevated in response to stress, and downregulation results in lysosomal abnormalities and mitochondrial changes. Inhibition of BACE can lead to reduced retinal function, retinal thinning, lipofuscin accumulation and vascular dysfunction in mice. Furthermore, BACE inhibition accelerates choroidal neovascularization (CNV) in mice. We propose that BACE plays an important role in retinal homeostasis and that BACE upregulation in response to stress is a protective measure.

Number:  13
UID:  26401691
Founded words:  ['associated', 'associated', 'regulating', 'regulating']
Abstract:  Proteolytic cleavage of the amyloid-β protein precursor (AβPP) by the enzyme BACE1 (BACE) is the initial step in production of amyloid-β peptide (Aβ), and as such has been a major target of Alzheimer's disease (AD) drug discovery efforts. Overproduction of Aβ results in neuronal cell death and accumulation of amyloid plaques in AD and in traumatic brain injury, and is also associated with stroke due to cerebral amyloid angiopathy. Herein we report for the first time that sAβPPα, the product of the cleavage of AβPP by α-secretase, is a potent endogenous direct inhibitor of the BACE enzyme, and that its inhibition is likely by an allosteric mechanism. Furthermore, using small-angle X-ray scattering, we show that sAβPPβ, which is identical to sAβPPα except for a 16-amino acid truncation at the carboxy terminus, adopts a completely different structure than sAβPPα and does not inhibit BACE. Our data thus reveal a novel mechanistic role played by sAβPPα in regulating overproduction of Aβ and restoring neuronal homeostasis and neuroprotection. Identification of sAβPPα as a direct BACE inhibitor may lead to design of new therapeutics targeting pathologies associated with overproduction of Aβ.

Number:  14
UID:  26342176
Founded words:  ['associating']
Abstract:  We recently found that sAPPα decreases amyloid-beta generation by directly associating with β-site amyloid precursor protein (APP)-converting enzyme 1 (BACE1), thereby modulating APP processing. Because inhibition of BACE1 decreases glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta (GSK3β)-mediated Alzheimer's disease (AD)-like tau phosphorylation in AD patient-derived neurons, we determined whether sAPPα also reduces GSK3β-mediated tau phosphorylation. We initially found increased levels of inhibitory phosphorylation of GSK3β (Ser9) in primary neurons from sAPPα over-expressing mice. Further, recombinant human sAPPα evoked the same phenomenon in SH-SY5Y cells. Further, in SH-SY5Y cells over-expressing BACE1, and HeLa cells over-expressing human tau, sAPPα reduced GSK3β activity and tau phosphorylation. Importantly, the reductions in GSK3β activity and tau phosphorylation elicited by sAPPα were prevented by BACE1 but not γ-secretase inhibition. In accord, AD mice over-expressing human sAPPα had less GSK3β activity and tau phosphorylation compared with controls. These results implicate a direct relationship between APP β-processing and GSK3β-mediated tau phosphorylation and further define the central role of sAPPα in APP autoregulation and AD pathogenesis.

Number:  15
UID:  26297990
Founded words:  ['complexes']
Abstract:  Acetylcholinesterase (AChE) inhibitors increase the availability of acetylcholine in central cholinergic synapses and are the most promising drugs currently available for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Our screening study indicated that the water fraction of the methanolic extract of Lycopodiella cernua (L.) Pic. Serm. significantly inhibited AChE in vitro. Bioassay-guided fractionation led to the isolation of a new lignan glycoside, lycocernuaside A (12), and fourteen known compounds (1-11 and 13-15). Compound 7 exhibited the most potent AChE inhibitory activity with an IC50 value of 0.23 μM. Compound 15 had the most potent inhibitory activity against BChE and BACE1 with IC50 values of 0.62 and 2.16 μM, respectively. Compounds 4 and 7 showed mixed- and competitive-type AChE inhibition. Compound 7 noncompetitively inhibited BChE whereas 15 showed competitive and 8, 13, and 14 showed mixed-type inhibition. The docking results for complexes with AChE or BChE revealed that inhibitors 4, 7, and 15 stably positioned themselves in several pocket/catalytic domains of the AChE and BChE residues.

Number:  16
UID:  26292218
Founded words:  ['regulated', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Human epithelial cell adhesion molecule (HEPCAM) is a tumor-associated antigen frequently expressed in carcinomas, which promotes proliferation after regulated intramembrane proteolysis. Here, we describe extracellular shedding of HEPCAM at two α-sites through a disintegrin and metalloprotease (ADAM) and at one β-site through BACE1. Transmembrane cleavage by γ-secretase occurs at three γ-sites to generate extracellular Aβ-like fragments and at two ϵ-sites to release human EPCAM intracellular domain HEPICD, which is efficiently degraded by the proteasome. Mapping of cleavage sites onto three-dimensional structures of HEPEX cis-dimer predicted conditional availability of α- and β-sites. Endocytosis of HEPCAM warrants acidification in cytoplasmic vesicles to dissociate protein cis-dimers required for cleavage by BACE1 at low pH values. Intramembrane cleavage sites are accessible and not part of the structurally important transmembrane helix dimer crossing region. Surprisingly, neither chemical inhibition of cleavage nor cellular knock-out of HEPCAM using CRISPR-Cas9 technology impacted the adhesion of carcinoma cell lines. Hence, a direct function of HEPCAM as an adhesion molecule in carcinoma cells is not supported and appears to be questionable.

Number:  17
UID:  26195137
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  The IC50 of a beta-secretase (BACE-1) lead compound was improved ∼200-fold from 11 μM to 55 nM through the addition of a single methyl group. Computational chemistry, small molecule NMR, and protein crystallography capabilities were used to compare the solution conformation of the ligand under varying pH conditions to its conformation when bound in the active site. Chemical modification then explored available binding pockets adjacent to the ligand. A strategically placed methyl group not only maintained the required pKa of the piperidine nitrogen and filled a small hydrophobic pocket, but more importantly, stabilized the conformation best suited for optimized binding to the receptor.

Number:  18
UID:  26186663
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'regulatory', 'regulates', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  BACE1, a major therapeutic target for treatment of Alzheimer's disease, functions within a narrow pH range. Despite tremendous effort and progress in the development of BACE1 inhibitors, details of the underlying pH-dependent regulatory mechanism remain unclear. Here we elucidate the pH-dependent conformational mechanism that regulates BACE1 activity using continuous constant-pH molecular dynamics (MD). The simulations reveal that BACE1 mainly occupies three conformational states and that the relative populations of the states shift according to pH. At intermediate pH, when the catalytic dyad is monoprotonated, a binding-competent state is highly populated, while at low and high pH a Tyr-inhibited state is dominant. Our data provide strong evidence supporting conformational selection as a major mechanism for substrate and peptide-inhibitor binding. These new insights, while consistent with experiment, greatly extend the knowledge of BACE1 and have implications for further optimization of inhibitors and understanding potential side effects of targeting BACE1. Finally, the work highlights the importance of properly modeling protonation states in MD simulations.

Number:  19
UID:  26123100
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activator', 'activated', 'mediated', 'regulator', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  Melatonin is involved in the control of various physiological functions, such as sleep, cell growth and free radical scavenging. The ability of melatonin to behave as an antioxidant, together with the fact that the Alzheimer-related amyloid β-peptide (Aβ) triggers oxidative stress through hydroxyl radical-induced cell death, suggests that melatonin could reduce Alzheimer's pathology. Although the exact etiology of Alzheimer's disease (AD) remains to be established, excess Aβ is believed to be the primary contributor to the dysfunction and degeneration of neurons that occurs in AD. Aβ peptides are produced via the sequential cleavage of β-secretase β-site APP-cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) and γ-secretase (PS1/PS2), while α-secretase (ADAM10) prevents the production of Aβ peptides. We hypothesized that melatonin could inhibit BACE1 and PS1/PS2 and enhance ADAM10 expression. Using the human neuronal SH-SY5Y cell line, we found that melatonin inhibited BACE1 and PS1 and activated ADAM10 mRNA level and protein expression in a concentration-dependent manner and mediated via melatonin G protein-coupled receptors. Melatonin inhibits BACE1 and PS1 protein expressions through the attenuation of nuclear factor-κB phosphorylation (pNF-κB). Moreover, melatonin reduced BACE1 promoter transactivation and consequently downregulated β-secretase catalytic activity. The present data show that melatonin is not only a potential regulator of β/γ-secretase but also an activator of α-secretase expression through the activation of protein kinase C, thereby favoring the nonamyloidogenic pathway over the amyloidogenic pathway. Altogether, our findings suggest that melatonin may be a potential therapeutic agent for reducing the risk of AD in humans.

Number:  20
UID:  26094578
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interactions', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interactions', 'interactions', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'binding', 'binding', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Activity cliffs are defined as pairs or groups of structurally similar or analogous compounds that share the same specific activity but have large differences in potency. Although activity cliffs are mostly studied in medicinal chemistry at the level of molecular graphs, they can also be assessed by comparing compound binding modes. If such three-dimensional activity cliffs (3D-cliffs) are studied on the basis of X-ray complex structures, experimental ligand-target interaction details can be taken into account. Rapid growth in the number of 3D-cliffs that can be derived from X-ray complex structures has made it possible to identify targets for which a substantial body of 3D-cliff information is available. Activity cliffs are typically studied to identify structure-activity relationship determinants and aid in compound optimization. However, 3D-cliff information can also be used to search for interaction hot spots and key residues, as reported herein. For six of seven drug targets for which more than 20 3D-cliffs were available, series of 3D-cliffs were identified that were consistently involved in interactions with different hot spots. These 3D-cliffs often encoded chemical modifications resulting in interactions that were characteristic of highly potent compounds but absent in weakly potent ones, thus providing information for structure-based design.

Number:  21
UID:  26092426
Founded words:  ['regulate']
Abstract:  Alzheimer's disease is a neuroinflammatory disease and is the most common cause of dementia in the elderly. Studies have shown the beneficial effects of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPAR-α) agonists on the treatment of neuroinflammatory diseases. The aim of the present study is to examine the ability of GW7647 (a PPAR-α agonist) to regulate amyloid precursor protein (APP) amyloidogenic processing in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells transfected with APPswe gene. After administration of GW7647 for 24 h, the levels of APP, soluble APPβ (sAPPβ), and presenilin 1 (PS-1) were assessed by Western blot. Cellular culture medium levels of amyloid-β 42 (Aβ42) were analyzed by ELISA, and the activity of beta-site APP cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE-1) was measured by fluorometric assay. We found that GW7647 decreased the expression of sAPPβ and the activity of BACE-1, and also reduced Aβ42 release. However, GW7647 did not modify the levels of APP and PS-1. Furthermore, LY294002, the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3-K) inhibitor, reversed the effects of GW7647 on the BACE-1 activity and the levels of sAPPβ and Aβ42. Our data demonstrate that GW7647 may reduce Aβ production via inhibiting BACE-1 activity, and this may involve in PI3-K pathway.

Number:  22
UID:  26062786
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'association', 'interaction', 'function', 'function', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Disrupted-in-Schizophrenia-1 (DISC1) is a genetic risk factor for a wide range of major mental disorders, including schizophrenia, major depression, and bipolar disorders. Recent reports suggest a potential role of DISC1 in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD), by referring to an interaction between DISC1 and amyloid precursor protein (APP), and to an association of a single-nucleotide polymorphism in a DISC1 intron and late onset of AD. However, the function of DISC1 in AD remains unknown. In this study, decreased levels of DISC1 were observed in the cortex and hippocampus of 8-month-old APP/PS1 transgenic mice, an animal model of AD. Overexpression of DISC1 reduced, whereas knockdown of DISC1 increased protein levels, but not mRNA levels of β-site APP-Cleaving Enzyme 1 (BACE1), a key enzyme in amyloid-β (Aβ) generation. Reduction of BACE1 protein levels by overexpression of DISC1 was accompanied by an accelerating decline rate of BACE1, and was blocked by the lysosomal inhibitor chloroquine, rather than proteasome inhibitor MG-132. Moreover, overexpression of DISC1 in the hippocampus with an adeno-associated virus reduced the levels of BACE1, soluble Aβ40/42, amyloid plaque density, and rescued cognitive deficits of APP/PS1 transgenic mice. These results indicate that DISC1 attenuates Aβ generation and cognitive deficits of APP/PS1 transgenic mice through promoting lysosomal degradation of BACE1. Our findings provide new insights into the role of DISC1 in AD pathogenesis and link a potential function of DISC1 to the psychiatric symptoms of AD.

Number:  23
UID:  26053850
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interact', 'interaction', 'interact', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  Proteolytic processing of amyloid-β precursor protein (APP) by beta-site APP cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) is the initial step in the production of amyloid beta (Aβ), which accumulates in senile plaques in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Essential for this cleavage is the transport and sorting of both proteins through endosomal/Golgi compartments. Golgi-localized γ-ear-containing ARF-binding (GGA) proteins have striking cargo-sorting functions in these pathways. Recently, GGA1 and GGA3 were shown to interact with BACE1, to be expressed in neurons, and to be decreased in AD brain, whereas little is known about GGA2. Since GGA1 impacts Aβ generation by confining APP to the Golgi and perinuclear compartments, we tested whether all GGAs modulate BACE1 and APP transport and processing. We observed decreased levels of secreted APP alpha (sAPPα), sAPPβ, and Aβ upon GGA overexpression, which could be reverted by knockdown. GGA-BACE1 co-immunoprecipitation was impaired upon GGA-GAE but not VHS domain deletion. Autoinhibition of the GGA1-VHS domain was irrelevant for BACE1 interaction. Our data suggest that all three GGAs affect APP processing via the GGA-GAE domain.

Number:  24
UID:  26037803
Founded words:  ['regulating', 'regulating', 'regulate', 'regulating', 'regulating', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  Astrocytes are major supportive cells in brains with important functions including providing nutrients and regulating neuronal activities. In this study, we demonstrated that astrocytes regulate amyloid precursor protein (APP) processing in neuronal cells through secretion of group IIA secretory phospholipase A2 (sPLA2-IIA). When astrocytic cells (DITNC) were mildly stimulated with the pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as TNF α and IL-1β, sPLA2-IIA was secreted into the medium. When conditioned medium containing sPLA2-IIA was applied to human neuroblastoma (SH-SY5Y) cells, there was an increase in both cell membrane fluidity and secretion of α-secretase-cleaved soluble amyloid precursor protein (sAPPα). These changes were abrogated by KH064, a selective inhibitor of sPLA2-IIA. In addition, exposing SH-SY5Y cells to recombinant human sPLA2-IIA also increased membrane fluidity, accumulation of APP at the cell surface, and secretion of sAPPα, but without altering total expressions of APP, α-secretases and β-site APP cleaving enzyme (BACE1). Taken together, our results provide novel information regarding a functional role of sPLA2-IIA in astrocytes for regulating APP processing in neuronal cells.

Number:  25
UID:  26003344
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction']
Abstract:  Three new serratene-type triterpenoids (1-3) and a new hydroxy unsaturated fatty acid (13) together with nine known compounds (4-12) were isolated from Lycopodiella cernua. The chemical structures were established using NMR, MS, and Mosher's method. Compound 13 showed the most potent inhibitory activity against acetylcholinesterase (AChE) with an IC50 value of 0.22μM. For butyrylcholinesterase (BChE) inhibitory activity, 5 showed the most potent activity with an IC50 value of 0.42μM. Compound 2 showed the most potent activity with an IC50 of 0.23μM for BACE-1 inhibitory activity. The kinetic activities were investigated to determine the type of enzyme inhibition involved. The types of AChE inhibition shown by compounds 4, 5, and 13 were mixed; BChE inhibition by 5 was competitive, while 2 and 6 showed mixed-types. In addition, molecular docking studies were performed to investigate the interaction of these compounds with the pocket sites of AChE. The docking results revealed that the tested inhibitors 3, 4, and 13 were stably present in several pocket domains of the AChE residue.

Number:  26
UID:  25976650
Founded words:  ['associated']
Abstract:  Radix Polygalae is a traditional Chinese medicine that has been used as a sedative and to improve memory for a number of years. The impact of Radix Polygalae in patients with Alzheimer's disease has been investigated. However the mechanisms underlying its effects remain unclear. In the current study, the toxicity of various doses (100, 40, 20, 10, 5 and 0 μg/ml) of Radix Polygalae was measured in the human neuroblastoma cell line (SH-SY5Y) using an MTT assay. Changes in amyloid β (Aβ) levels in the supernatant of Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells overexpressing β-amyloid pro-protein (APP) and BACE1 (CHO-APP/BACE1), were detected using an ELISA assay. In order to confirm that the Aβ reduction was associated with autophagy, the autophagy marker protein, light chain 3 (LC3), was measured by western blot analysis and autophagosomes were assessed using MDC staining. In addition, the mechanism underlying the autophagy induced by Radix Polygalae was analyzed using western blotting to measure the protein expression of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), p70s6k, Raptor, protein kinase B and adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK), in addition to the phosphorylated forms of these proteins. The results demonstrated no significant toxicity of Radix Polygalae in SH-SY5Y cells, at a dose of 100 μg/ml. The secretion of Aβ was markedly reduced following treatment with Radix Polygalae, and this reduction occurred in a dose-dependent manner. The autophagy levels were shown to be enhanced in the drug treatment group, using fluorescence microscopy. In addition, levels of LC3II/LC3I, the marker protein of autophagy, were also increased. The results of the current study suggest that Radix Polygalae may aid in the elimination of the Aβ peptide, via the induction of autophagy, by the AMPK/mTOR signaling pathway. These results may provide a basis for further kin vivo investigation.

Number:  27
UID:  25957769
Founded words:  ['interacts', 'interacts', 'regulating', 'regulating', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  β-Site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme-1 (BACE1) is a central molecule in Alzheimer's disease (AD). It cleaves amyloid precursor protein (APP) to produce the toxic amyloid-β (Aβ) peptides. Thus, a novel BACE1 modulator could offer a new therapeutic strategy for AD. We report that C-type lectin-like domain family 4, member g (Clec4g, also designated as LSECtin) interacts with BACE1 in mouse brain and cultured cells. Overexpression of Clec4g suppressed BACE1-mediated Aβ generation, and affected the intracellular distribution of BACE1 but not its catalytic activity. These results highlight a novel role of Clec4g in negatively regulating BACE1 function.

Number:  28
UID:  25926467
Founded words:  ['activate', 'associated', 'associated', 'function', 'function', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Multiple small-molecule inhibitors of the β-secretase enzyme (BACE1) are under preclinical or clinical investigation for Alzheimer's disease (AD). Prior work has illustrated robust lowering of central amyloid β (Aβ) after acute administration of BACE1 inhibitors. However, very few studies have assessed the overall impact of chronically administered BACE1 inhibitors on brain amyloid burden, neuropathology, and behavioral function in aged preclinical models. We investigated the effects of a potent nonbrain-penetrant BACE1 inhibitor, delivered directly to the brain using intracerebroventricular infusion in an aged transgenic mouse model. Intracerebroventricular infusion of the BACE1 inhibitor (0.3-23.5 μg/d) for 8 weeks, initiated in 17-month-old Tg2576 mice, produced dose-dependent increases in brain inhibitor concentrations (0.2-13 μm). BACE1 inhibition significantly reversed the behavioral deficit in contextual fear conditioning, and reduced brain Aβ levels, plaque burden, and associated pathology (e.g., dystrophic neurites), with maximal effects attained with ∼1 μg/d dose. Strikingly, the BACE1 inhibitor also reversed amyloid pathology below baseline levels (amyloid burden at the start of treatment), without adversely affecting cerebral amyloid angiopathy, microhemorrhages, myelination, or neuromuscular function. Inhibitor-mediated decline in brain amyloid pathology was associated with an increase in microglial ramification. This is the first demonstration of chronically administered BACE1 inhibitor to activate microglia, reverse brain amyloid pathology, and elicit functional improvement in an aged transgenic mouse model. Thus, engagement of novel glial-mediated clearance mechanisms may drive disease-modifying therapeutic benefit with BACE1 inhibition in AD.

Number:  29
UID:  25906170
Founded words:  ['interact', 'interact', 'binding', 'binding', 'bind', 'bind', 'binding', 'binding', 'bind', 'bind']
Abstract:  Free energy calculations are used to study how strongly potential drug molecules interact with their target receptors. The accuracy of these calculations depends on the accuracy of the molecular dynamics (MD) force field as well as proper sampling of the major conformations of each molecule. However, proper sampling of ligand conformations can be difficult when there are large barriers separating the major ligand conformations. An example of this is for ligands with an asymmetrically substituted phenyl ring, where the presence of protein loops hinders the proper sampling of the different ring conformations. These ring conformations become more difficult to sample when the size of the functional groups attached to the ring increases. The Adaptive Integration Method (AIM) has been developed, which adaptively changes the alchemical coupling parameter λ during the MD simulation so that conformations sampled at one λ can aid sampling at the other λ values. The Accelerated Adaptive Integration Method (AcclAIM) builds on AIM by lowering potential barriers for specific degrees of freedom at intermediate λ values. However, these methods may not work when there are very large barriers separating the major ligand conformations. In this work, we describe a modification to AIM that improves sampling of the different ring conformations, even when there is a very large barrier between them. This method combines AIM with conformational Monte Carlo sampling, giving improved convergence of ring populations and the resulting free energy. This method, called AIM/MC, is applied to study the relative binding free energy for a pair of ligands that bind to thrombin and a different pair of ligands that bind to aspartyl protease β-APP cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1). These protein-ligand binding free energy calculations illustrate the improvements in conformational sampling and the convergence of the free energy compared to both AIM and AcclAIM.

Number:  30
UID:  25863345
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interactions', 'binding', 'binding', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  β-secretase 1 (BACE1) initiates the proteolysis of amyloid precursor protein (APP) to generate Aβ, aggregation of which has been considered to be the main histopathological feature of Alzheimer's Disease. Here, we have explored the conformational switching of BACE1 during APP recognition using molecular dynamics simulation thereby suggesting the recognition to be a conformational selection process. Free BACE1 is highly flexible and exists as an ensemble of conformations. The β-hairpin flap that covers the active site of BACE1 visits numerous conformations during the simulation. Essential dynamics reveal that concerted movements in several loops including the flap region lead to a conformational switching from open to closed form. During the simulation, free BACE1 visits both the open and closed forms multiple times. Binding of APP to the BACE1 cavity shifts the equilibrium towards a stable complex stabilized by strong electrostatic surface complementarity along with several van der Waals and hydrogen bonding interactions.

Number:  31
UID:  25855499
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binders', 'binding']
Abstract:  Inhibition-in-solution assays (ISA) employing surface-based biosensors such as surface plasmon resonance (SPR) are an effective screening approach in drug discovery. However, analysis of potent binders remains a significant hurdle due to limited sensitivity and accompanied depletion of the inhibiting compounds due to high protein concentrations needed for detectable binding signals. To overcome this limitation, we explored a microscopy-based single-molecule ISA compatible with liposome-reconstituted membrane proteins. Using a set of validated small molecule inhibitors against β-secretase 1 (BACE1), the assay was benchmarked with respect to sensitivity and dynamic range against SPR. We demonstrate that the dynamic range of measurable affinities is greatly extended by more than 2 orders of magnitude as compared to SPR, thus facilitating measurements of highly potent (Kd < nM) compounds.

Number:  32
UID:  25824396
Founded words:  ['function', 'function', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Mature brain-derived neurotrophic factor (mBDNF) plays a vital role in the nervous system, whereas proBDNF elicits neurodegeneration and neuronal apoptosis. Although current enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) has been widely used to measure BDNF levels, it cannot differentiate mBDNF from proBDNF. As the function of proBDNF differs from mBDNF, it is necessary to establish an ELISA assay specific for the detection of mBDNF. Therefore, we aimed to establish a new mBDNF-specific sandwich ELISA. In this study, we have screened and found a combination of antibodies for a sandwich ELISA. A monoclonal antibody and sheep anti-BDNF were chosen as capture and detection antibody for sandwich ELISA respectively. The new ELISA showed no cross-reactivity to human recombinant NT-3, NT-4, nerve growth factor and negligible cross-reactivity (0.99-4.99%) for proBDNF compared to commercial ELISA kits (33.18-91.09%). The application of the new mBDNF ELISA was shown through the measurement of mBDNF levels in different brain regions of rats and in the brain of β-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1)(-/-) and WT mice and compared to western blot. Overall, this new ELISA will be useful for the measurement of mBDNF levels with high specificity. As the function of proBDNF differs from mBDNF (mature BDNF), it is necessary to establish an ELISA specific for the detection of mBDNF. Here, we present a novel sandwich ELISA which detects mBDNF with high specificity. This new ELISA will be useful for the measurement of mBDNF levels with high specificity in various human and animal tissues. proBDNF, precursor of BDNF; BDNF, brain-derived neurotrophic factor; NT-3, neurotrophin-3; NT-4, neurotrophin-4; NGF, nerve growth factor.

Number:  33
UID:  25808939
Founded words:  ['association', 'regulatory']
Abstract:  Parkinson's disease (n = 86) and control (n = 161) DNA were genotyped for 19 regulatory region tagging single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within nine genes (APP, ADAM10, BACE1, BACE2, PSEN1, PSEN2, PEN2, NCSTN, and APH1B) involved in the cleavage of APP. The SNP genotypes were tested for their association with CSF biomarkers and PD risk while adjusting for age, sex, and APOE ɛ4 status.

Number:  34
UID:  25808939
Founded words:  ['associated']
Abstract:  In addition, results of this exploratory investigation suggest that an APP SNP and an APH1B SNP are marginally associated with PD CSF Aβ42 levels in APOE ɛ4 noncarriers. Further hypotheses generated include that decreased CSF Aβ42 levels are in part driven by genetic variation in APP processing genes. Additional investigation into the relationship between these findings and clinical characteristics of PD, including cognitive impairment, compared with other neurodegenerative diseases, such as AD, are warranted. © 2015 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

Number:  35
UID:  25781223
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interactions', 'binding', 'binding', 'complexes', 'complexes']
Abstract:  In recent years, the first generation of β-secretase (BACE1) inhibitors advanced into clinical development for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, the alignment of drug-like properties and selectivity remains a major challenge. Herein, we describe the discovery of a novel class of potent, low clearance, CNS penetrant BACE1 inhibitors represented by thioamidine 5. Further profiling suggested that a high fraction of the metabolism (>95%) was due to CYP2D6, increasing the potential risk for victim-based drug-drug interactions (DDI) and variable exposure in the clinic due to the polymorphic nature of this enzyme. To guide future design, we solved crystal structures of CYP2D6 complexes with substrate 5 and its corresponding metabolic product pyrazole 6, which provided insight into the binding mode and movements between substrate/inhibitor complexes. Guided by the BACE1 and CYP2D6 crystal structures, we designed and synthesized analogues with reduced risk for DDI, central efficacy, and improved hERG therapeutic margins.

Number:  36
UID:  25773675
Founded words:  ['activation', 'interacts', 'interacts', 'binding', 'binding', 'regulate', 'regulates']
Abstract:  In patient with Alzheimer's disease (AD), deposition of amyloid-beta Aβ, a proteolytic cleavage of amyloid precursor protein (APP) by β-secretase/BACE1, forms senile plaque in the brain. BACE1 activation is caused due to oxidative stresses and dysfunction of ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS), which is linked to p53 inactivation. As partial suppression of BACE1 attenuates Aβ generation and AD-related pathology, it might be an ideal target for AD treatment. We have shown that both in neurons and in HEK-APP cells, BACE1 is a new substrate of E3-ligase CHIP and an inverse relation exists between CHIP and BACE1 level. CHIP inhibits ectopic BACE1 level by promoting its ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation, thus reducing APP processing; it stabilizes APP in neurons, thus reducing Aβ. CHIP(U) (box) domain physically interacts with BACE1; however, both U-box and TPR domain are essential for ubiquitination and degradation of BACE1. Further, BACE1 is a downstream target of p53 and overexpression of p53 decreases BACE1 level. In HEK-APP cells, CHIP is shown to negatively regulate BACE1 promoter through stabilization of p53's DNA-binding conformation and its binding upon 5' UTR element (+127 to +150). We have thus discovered that CHIP regulates p53-mediated trans-repression of BACE1 at both transcriptional and post-translational level. We propose that a CHIP-BACE1-p53 feedback loop might control APP stabilization, which could further be utilized for new therapeutic intervention in AD.

Number:  37
UID:  25716831
Founded words:  ['activation', 'interaction', 'associates', 'associates', 'interaction', 'regulates', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  The β-secretase BACE1 is widely known for its pivotal role in the amyloidogenic pathway leading to Alzheimer's disease, but how its action on transmembrane proteins other than the amyloid precursor protein affects the nervous system is only beginning to be understood. We report here that BACE1 regulates neuronal excitability through an unorthodox, nonenzymatic interaction with members of the KCNQ (Kv7) family that give rise to the M-current, a noninactivating potassium current with slow kinetics. In hippocampal neurons from BACE1(-/-) mice, loss of M-current enhanced neuronal excitability. We relate the diminished M-current to the previously reported epileptic phenotype of BACE1-deficient mice. In HEK293T cells, BACE1 amplified reconstituted M-currents, altered their voltage dependence, accelerated activation, and slowed deactivation. Biochemical evidence strongly suggested that BACE1 physically associates with channel proteins in a β-subunit-like fashion. Our results establish BACE1 as a physiologically essential constituent of regular M-current function and elucidate a striking new feature of how BACE1 impacts on neuronal activity in the intact and diseased brain.

Number:  38
UID:  25712587
Founded words:  ['regulating', 'regulating']
Abstract:  Amyloid-β (Aβ)-peptide, the major constituent of the plaques that develop during Alzheimer's disease, is generated via the cleavage of Aβ precursor protein (APP) by β-site APP-cleaving enzyme (BACE). Using live-cell imaging of APP and BACE labeled with pH-sensitive proteins, we could detect the release events of APP and BACE and their distinct kinetics. We provide kinetic evidence for the cleavage of APP by α-secretase on the cellular surface after exocytosis. Furthermore, simultaneous dual-color evanescent field illumination revealed that the two proteins are trafficked to the surface in separate compartments. Perturbing the membrane lipid composition resulted in a reduced frequency of exocytosis and affected BACE more strongly than APP. We propose that surface fusion frequency is a key factor regulating the aggregation of APP and BACE in the same membrane compartment and that this process can be modulated via pharmacological intervention.

Number:  39
UID:  25707809
Founded words:  ['interacting', 'interacted', 'interacting', 'interacted', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  Beta-site APP cleaving enzyme1 (BACE1) catalyzes the rate determining step in the generation of Aβ peptide and is widely considered as a potential therapeutic drug target for Alzheimer's disease (AD). Active site of BACE1 contains catalytic aspartic (Asp) dyad and flap. Asp dyad cleaves the substrate amyloid precursor protein with the help of flap. Currently, there are no marketed drugs available against BACE1 and existing inhibitors are mostly pseudopeptide or synthetic derivatives. There is a need to search for a potent inhibitor with natural scaffold interacting with flap and Asp dyad. This study screens the natural database InterBioScreen, followed by three-dimensional (3D) QSAR pharmacophore modeling, mapping, in silico ADME/T predictions to find the potential BACE1 inhibitors. Further, molecular dynamics of selected inhibitors were performed to observe the dynamic structure of protein after ligand binding. All conformations and the residues of binding region were stable but the flap adopted a closed conformation after binding with the ligand. Bond oligosaccharide interacted with the flap as well as catalytic dyad via hydrogen bond throughout the simulation. This led to stabilize the flap in closed conformation and restricted the entry of substrate. Carbohydrates have been earlier used in the treatment of AD because of their low toxicity, high efficiency, good biocompatibility, and easy permeability through the blood-brain barrier. Our finding will be helpful in identify the potential leads to design novel BACE1 inhibitors for AD therapy.

Number:  40
UID:  25706765
Founded words:  ['activate', 'bind', 'bind', 'regulation', 'regulation']
Abstract:  Hippocampus is the brain center for memory formation, a process that requires synaptogenesis. However, hippocampus is dramatically compromised in Alzheimer's disease due to the accumulation of amyloid β-peptide, whose production is initiated by β-site APP Cleaving Enzyme 1 (BACE1). It is known that pathological stressors activate BACE1 translation through the phosphorylation of the eukaryotic initiation factor-2α (eIF2α) by GCN2, PERK, or PKR kinases, leading to amyloidogenesis. However, BACE1 physiological regulation is still unclear. Since nitric oxide (NO) participates directly in hippocampal glutamatergic signaling, we investigated the neuronal role of the heme-regulated eukaryotic initiation factor eIF2α kinase (HRI), which can bind NO by a heme group, in BACE1 translation and its physiological consequences.

Number:  41
UID:  25706765
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activation']
Abstract:  We found that BACE1 is expressed on glutamate activation with NO being the downstream effector by triggering eIF2α phosphorylation, as it was obtained by Western blot and luciferase assay. It is due to the activation of HRI by NO as assayed by Western blot and immunofluorescence with an HRI inhibitor and HRI siRNA. BACE1 expression was early detected at synaptic spines, contributing to spine growth and consolidating the hippocampal memory as assayed with mice treated with HRI or neuronal NO synthase inhibitors.

Number:  42
UID:  25706765
Founded words:  ['function', 'function']
Abstract:  We provide the first description that HRI and eIF2α are working in physiological conditions in the brain under the control of nitric oxide and glutamate signaling, and also that BACE1 has a physiological role in hippocampal function.

Number:  43
UID:  25706765
Founded words:  ['functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  We conclude that BACE1 translation is controlled by NO through HRI in glutamatergic hippocampal synapses, where it plays physiological functions, allowing the spine growth and memory consolidation.

Number:  44
UID:  25667085
Founded words:  ['activated', 'regulating', 'regulating']
Abstract:  Clinical and experimental biomedical studies have shown Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) to be a risk factor for the development of Alzheimer's disease (AD). This study demonstrates the effect of metformin, a therapeutic biguanide administered for T2DM therapy, on β-amyloid precursor protein (APP) metabolism in in vitro, ex vivo and in vivo models. Furthermore, the protective role of insulin against metformin is also demonstrated. In LAN5 neuroblastoma cells, metformin increases APP and presenilin levels, proteins involved in AD. Overexpression of APP and presenilin 1 (Pres 1) increases APP cleavage and intracellular accumulation of β-amyloid peptide (Aβ), which, in turn, promotes aggregation of Aβ. In the experimental conditions utilized the drug causes oxidative stress, mitochondrial damage, decrease of Hexokinase-II levels and cytochrome C release, all of which lead to cell death. Several changes in oxidative stress-related genes following metformin treatment were detected by PCR arrays specific for the oxidative stress pathway. These effects of metformin were found to be antagonized by the addition of insulin, which reduced Aβ levels, oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction and cell death. Similarly, antioxidant molecules, such as ferulic acid and curcumin, are able to revert metformin's effect. Comparable results were obtained using peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Finally, the involvement of NF-κB transcription factor in regulating APP and Pres 1 expression was investigated. Upon metformin treatment, NF-κB is activated and translocates from the cytoplasm to the nucleus, where it induces increased APP and Pres 1 transcription. The use of Bay11-7085 inhibitor suppressed the effect of metformin on APP and Pres 1 expression.

Number:  45
UID:  25625854
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'complexes']
Abstract:  BACE1, the aspartate protease that generates amyloid-β peptide (Aβ) in the brain of AD (Alzheimer's disease) patients, has emerged as a pharmaceutically relevant target. Here, a fragment-based in silico approach has been adopted to design novel compounds with increased ligand efficiency for BACE1, before screening for brain permeability and toxicity. Fragments docked to the active site of BACE1 and sorted into two groups using binding energy cut-off, were joined to create novel ligands with binding energy lying in the range between -11.36 kcal/mol and -8.56 kcal/mol. Interestingly, QIN, a known inhibitor of BACE1 with an IC50 of 11nM, when docked to BACE1, shows a binding energy (-9.43 kcal/mol) lying within the range of the novel ligand-BACE1 complexes. The present strategy thus enabled the design of four novel inhibitors of BACE1 with favourable binding energy, brain permeability and no toxicity that might show promise as leads in future.

Number:  46
UID:  25624418
Founded words:  ['regulation', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Studies have shown an increased expression of mitochondrial ferritin (FtMt) and an antioxidant role for the protein in the brains of Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients. However, little information is available concerning the role of FtMt in other AD pathologies, including inflammation and amyloidogenesis. Therefore, we investigated the regulation and function of FtMt in inflammation and amyloidogenesis. FtMt protein expression was increased by proinflammatory cytokines, including tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), interleukin-1β (IL-1β), and interleukin 6 (IL-6), whereas FtMt mRNA levels were increased by TNF-α but not by IL-1β or IL-6 in IMR-32 cells. The transcription factor nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) inhibitor, Bay 11-7082, suppressed this TNF-α-induced FtMt expression. FtMt overexpression increased NF-κB activity and translocation of p65 into the nucleus in HEK293 cells. Conversely, knockdown of FtMt attenuated TNF-α-induced NF-κB activity. Overexpression of FtMt inhibited TNF-α-induced apoptosis in the cell culture. FtMt overexpression reduced iron-mediated expression of amyloid-β protein precursor and decreased NF-κB-dependent increases in β- and γ-secretase, leading to decreased amyloid-β production. Our data provide new insights into the mechanism underlying the regulation of FtMt expression by proinflammatory cytokines and indicate further roles for FtMt in AD.

Number:  47
UID:  25599931
Founded words:  ['functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  BACE1 (beta site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme 1) is the rate limiting protease in amyloid β production, hence a promising drug target for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease. Inhibition of BACE1, as the major β-secretase in vivo with multiple substrates, however is likely to have mechanism-based adverse effects. We explored the impact of long-term pharmacological inhibition of BACE1 on dendritic spine dynamics, synaptic functions, and cognitive performance of adult mice.

Number:  48
UID:  25599931
Founded words:  ['functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  Sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay was used to assess Aβ40 levels in brain and plasma after oral administration of BACE1 inhibitors SCH1682496 or LY2811376. In vivo two-photon microscopy of the somatosensory cortex was performed to monitor structural dynamics of dendritic spines while synaptic functions and plasticity were measured via electrophysiological recordings of excitatory postsynaptic currents and hippocampal long-term potentiation in brain slices. Finally, behavioral tests were performed to analyze the impact of pharmacological inhibition of BACE1 on cognitive performance.

Number:  49
UID:  25599931
Founded words:  ['associated']
Abstract:  Dose-dependent decrease of Aβ40 levels in vivo confirmed suppression of BACE1 activity by both inhibitors. Prolonged treatment caused a reduction in spine formation of layer V pyramidal neurons, which recovered after withdrawal of inhibitors. Congruently, the rate of spontaneous and miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents in pyramidal neurons and hippocampal long-term potentiation were reduced in animals treated with BACE1 inhibitors. These effects were not detected in Bace1(-/-) mice treated with SCH1682496, confirming BACE1 as the pharmacological target. Described structural and functional changes were associated with cognitive deficits as revealed in behavioral tests.

Number:  50
UID:  25599931
Founded words:  ['functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  Our findings indicate important functions to BACE1 in structural and functional synaptic plasticity in the mature brain, with implications for cognition.

Number:  51
UID:  25596147
Founded words:  ['mediates', 'regulates']
Abstract:  Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder. Many molecular lesions have been detected in AD, of which the most commonly observed is the accumulation of misfolded proteins, including β-amyloid (Aβ40 and Aβ42) and tau, in the aging brain. The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway mediates Aβ clearance through autophagy and regulates tau phosphorylation via glycogen synthase kinase-3β (GSK3β). Thus, mTOR becomes an important therapeutic target for AD. However, no mTOR inhibitor has yet been marketed to treat AD. Here, we discovered a natural product, wogonin, which could potently promote Aβ clearance in the primary neural astrocytes and significantly decrease Aβ secretion in SH-SY5Y-APP and BACE1 cells [SH-SY5Y cells stably expressing the human amyloid precursor protein (APP) and β-secretase (BACE1)] through the mTOR/autophagy signaling pathway. Additionally, further research revealed that wogonin inhibited the activity of GSK3β via mTOR inhibition, finally leading to tau phosphorylation reduction in SH-SHY5Y cells and primary neural astrocytes. In conclusion, our study identified a small molecule, wogonin, which could effectively promote Aβ clearance and decrease tau phosphorylation, and highlighted its therapeutic potential for AD treatment.

Number:  52
UID:  25590804
Founded words:  ['activated', 'activates', 'associated']
Abstract:  Brain thiamine homeostasis has an important role in energy metabolism and displays reduced activity in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Thiamine deficiency (TD) induces regionally specific neuronal death in the animal and human brains associated with a mild chronic impairment of oxidative metabolism. These features make the TD model amenable to investigate the cellular mechanisms of neurodegeneration. Once activated by various cellular stresses, including oxidative stress, PKR acts as a pro-apoptotic kinase and negatively controls the protein translation leading to an increase of BACE1 translation. In this study, we used a mouse TD model to assess the involvement of PKR in neuronal death and the molecular mechanisms of AD. Our results showed that the TD model activates the PKR-eIF2α pathway, increases the BACE1 expression levels of Aβ in specific thalamus nuclei and induces motor deficits and neurodegeneration. These effects are reversed by PKR downregulation (using a specific inhibitor or in PKR knockout mice).

Number:  53
UID:  25589732
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activation', 'mediates', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulating', 'regulating']
Abstract:  Beta-secretase (BACE1) controls an essential step for the generation of amyloid- peptide (Aβ). As Aβ forms the principle pathologies in Alzheimer’s disease, lowering A production by inhibiting BACE1 is a plausible therapeutic approach. In the present study, we identified a natural polyphenol, luteolin, as a potent inhibitor of BACE1 transcription inhuman embryonic kidney 293 (HEK293) and human neuroblastoma (SH-SY5Y) cell lines. Luteolin is capable of suppressing the activation of BACE1 promoter by NF-κB signaling. We further characterized that luteolin interferes with NF-κB signaling by with both directly and indirectly disrupting p65 complex formation. In addition, we discovered that estrogen receptor mediates luteolin’s effect in inhibiting NF-κB signaling inhibiting and BACE1 transcription. Interestingly, the beneficial effects of luteolin may be attributed to selective activation profiles of luteolin to different estrogen receptor subtypes. Our study reports luteolin as a potent BACE1-inhibiting compound, providing useful information in understanding estrogen receptor- and NF-κB-mediated signaling and in regulating BACE1 expression.

Number:  54
UID:  25389560
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  The optimization of a series of aminooxazoline xanthene inhibitors of β-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) is described. An early lead compound showed robust Aβ lowering activity in a rat pharmacodynamic model, but advancement was precluded by a low therapeutic window to QTc prolongation in cardiovascular models consistent with in vitro activity on the hERG ion channel. While the introduction of polar groups was effective in reducing hERG binding affinity, this came at the expense of higher than desired Pgp-mediated efflux. A balance of low Pgp efflux and hERG activity was achieved by lowering the polar surface area of the P3 substituent while retaining polarity in the P2' side chain. The introduction of a fluorine in position 4 of the xanthene ring improved BACE1 potency (5-10-fold). The combination of these optimized fragments resulted in identification of compound 40, which showed robust Aβ reduction in a rat pharmacodynamic model (78% Aβ reduction in CSF at 10 mg/kg po) and also showed acceptable cardiovascular safety in vivo.

Number:  55
UID:  25378646
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  Using therapeutic antibodies that need to cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB) to treat neurological disease is a difficult challenge. We have shown that bispecific antibodies with optimized binding to the transferrin receptor (TfR) that target β-secretase (BACE1) can cross the BBB and reduce brain amyloid-β (Aβ) in mice. Can TfR enhance antibody uptake in the primate brain? We describe two humanized TfR/BACE1 bispecific antibody variants. Using a human TfR knock-in mouse, we observed that anti-TfR/BACE1 antibodies could cross the BBB and reduce brain Aβ in a TfR affinity-dependent fashion. Intravenous dosing of monkeys with anti-TfR/BACE1 antibodies also reduced Aβ both in cerebral spinal fluid and in brain tissue, and the degree of reduction correlated with the brain concentration of anti-TfR/BACE1 antibody. These results demonstrate that the TfR bispecific antibody platform can robustly and safely deliver therapeutic antibody across the BBB in the primate brain.

Number:  56
UID:  25376768
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interactions', 'regulating', 'regulating', 'functions', 'functions', 'function', 'function', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  Understanding mechanisms governing the trafficking of transmembrane (TM) cargoes to synapses and other specialized membranes in neurons represents a long-standing challenge in cell biology. Investigation of the neuron-enriched endosomal protein of 21 kDa (NEEP21, or NSG1or P21) and Calcyon (Caly, or NSG3) indicates that the emergence of the NEEP21/Caly/P19 gene family could play a vital role in the success of these mechanisms in vertebrates. The upshot of a sizeable body of work is that the NEEP21 and Caly perform distinct endocytic and recycling functions, which impact (i) α amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid-type glutamate receptor trafficking at excitatory synapses; (ii) transport to/in neuronal axons; as well as (iii) proteolytic processing of amyloid precursor protein and neuregulin 1, suggesting roles in neuron development, synaptic function, and neurodegeneration. We argue that their distinct effects on cargo endocytosis and recycling depend on interactions with vesicle trafficking and synaptic scaffolding proteins. As they play complementary, but opposing roles in cargo endocytosis, recycling, and degradation, balancing NEEP21 and Caly expression levels or activity could be important for homeostasis in a variety of signaling pathways, and also lead to a novel therapeutic strategy for disorders like Alzheimer's disease and schizophrenia. This review focuses on two closely related, neuron-enriched endosomal proteins: NEEP21 and Calcyon which perform distinct roles in regulating receptor endocytosis, recycling, and degradation. Based on an in-depth examination of the literature, we argue that these two proteins carry out complementary yet sometimes opposing vesicle trafficking functions that impact excitatory transmission, transcytosis, axonal transport, and also proteolytic processing by beta-secretase I (BACE1). Finally, we propose that balancing NEEP21 and Calcyon expression and/or activity could be important for homeostasis in a variety of signaling pathways, and also lead to a novel therapeutic strategy for disorders like Alzheimer's disease and schizophrenia. AMPA = α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid receptor; NMDA = N-Methyl-D-aspartate.

Number:  57
UID:  25363711
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  We have previously shown that the aminooxazoline xanthene scaffold can generate potent and orally efficacious BACE1 inhibitors although certain of these compounds exhibited potential hERG liabilities. In this article, we describe 4-aza substitution on the xanthene core as a means to increase BACE1 potency while reducing hERG binding affinity. Further optimization of the P3 and P2' side chains resulted in the identification of 42 (AMG-8718), a compound with a balanced profile of BACE1 potency, hERG binding affinity, and Pgp recognition. This compound produced robust and sustained reductions of CSF and brain Aβ levels in a rat pharmacodynamic model and exhibited significantly reduced potential for QTc elongation in a cardiovascular safety model.

Number:  58
UID:  25359283
Founded words:  ['activating', 'regulatory', 'regulated', 'regulated']
Abstract:  BACE1 gene encodes for β-Site amyloid β precursor protein (APP)-cleaving enzyme1, which is required for generating amyloid β protein(Aβ). Deposition of Aβ in brain plays an essential role in Alzheimer's Disease (AD) pathogenesis. BACE1 gene has a tissue-specific expression pattern and its expression is tightly regulated at transcriptional level. Core promoter is a minimal DNA sequence to direct transcription initiation and serves as a converging platform for the vast network of regulatory events. Here we identified the core promoter of human BACE1 gene, which is a 71 nucleotides region absent of typical known core promoter elements and is sufficient to initiate a basal transcription. Two novel DNA motifs, designated TCE1 and TCE2, were found to be involved in activating the transcription of human BACE1 gene in a synergistic way. Two single nucleotide mutations in these motifs completely abolished the promoter activity. In conclusion, our studies have demonstrated that novel DNA motif TCE1 and TCE2 in human BACE1 gene promoter are two essential cis-acting elements for BACE1 gene transcription. Studies on how these two motifs being regulated by different stimuli could provide insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying AD pathogenesis and pharmaceutical potentials of targeting these motifs for AD treatment.

Number:  59
UID:  25349163
Founded words:  ['activator', 'activates', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'binds', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Neuregulin1 (NRG1) is a single transmembrane protein that plays a critical role in neural development and synaptic plasticity. Both NRG1 and its receptor, ErbB4, are well-established risk genes of schizophrenia. The NRG1 ecto-domain (ED) binds and activates ErbB4 following proteolytic cleavage of pro-NRG1 precursor protein. Although several studies have addressed the function of NRG1 in brain, very little is known about the cleavage and shedding mechanism. Here we show that the neuronal vesicular protein calcyon is a potent activator and key determinant of NRG1 ED cleavage and shedding. Calcyon stimulates clathrin-mediated endocytosis and endosomal targeting; and its levels are elevated in postmortem brains of schizophrenics. Overexpression of calcyon stimulates NRG1 cleavage and signaling in vivo, and as a result, GABA transmission is enhanced in calcyon overexpressing mice. Conversely, NRG1 cleavage, ErbB4 activity and GABA transmission are decreased in calcyon null mice. Moreover, stimulation of NRG1 cleavage by calcyon was recapitulated in HEK 293 cells suggesting the mechanism involved is cell-autonomous. Finally, studies with site-specific mutants in calcyon and inhibitors for the major sheddases indicate that the stimulatory effects of calcyon on NRG1 cleavage and shedding depend on clathrin-mediated endocytosis, β-secretase 1, and interaction with clathrin adaptor proteins. Together these results identify a novel mechanism for NRG1 cleavage and shedding.

Number:  60
UID:  25254246
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  Beta-amyloid precursor protein cleavage enzyme 1 (BACE1) and beta-amyloid precursor protein cleavage enzyme 2 (BACE2), members of aspartyl protease family, are close homologues and have high similarity in their protein crystal structures. However, their enzymatic properties differ leading to disparate clinical consequences. In order to identify the residues that are responsible for such differences, we used evolutionary trace (ET) method to compare the amino acid conservation patterns of BACE1 and BACE2 in several mammalian species. We found that, in BACE1 and BACE2 structures, most of the ligand binding sites are conserved which indicate their enzymatic property of aspartyl protease family members. The other conserved residues are more or less randomly localized in other parts of the structures. Four group-specific residues were identified at the ligand binding site of BACE1 and BACE2. We postulated that these residues would be essential for selectivity of BACE1 and BACE2 biological functions and could be sites of interest for the design of selective inhibitors targeting either BACE1 or BACE2.

Number:  61
UID:  25211541
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  Molecular docking strategies are one of the most widely used techniques for predicting the binding mode of a ligand and for obtaining new hits in virtual screening studies. In order to improve the accuracy of this approach, we tested the reliability of applying a consensus docking protocol by combining ten different docking procedures. The analysis was carried out in terms of consensus cross-docking and by using an enriched database. The results highlight that from a qualitative point of view consensus docking is able to predict the ligand binding pose better than the single docking programs and is also able to give hints concerning the reliability of the docking pose. With regard to the virtual screening studies, consensus docking was evaluated for three different targets of the Directory of Useful Decoys (DUD), and the obtained results suggest that this approach performs as well as the best available methods found in the literature, therefore supporting the idea that this procedure can be profitably applied for the identification of new hits.

Number:  62
UID:  25204716
Founded words:  ['activated']
Abstract:  The neuropathological hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease include extracellular neuritic plaques and neurofibrillary tangles. The neuritic plaques contain β-amyloid peptides (Aβ peptides) as the major proteinaceous constituent and are surrounded by activated microglia and astrocytes as well as dystrophic neurites. N-terminally truncated forms of Aβ peptides are highly prevalent in neuritic plaques, including Aβ 3-x beginning at Glu eventually modified to pyroglutamate (Aβ N3pE-x), Aβ 2-x, Aβ 4-x, and Aβ 5-x. The precise origin of the different N-terminally modified Aβ peptides currently remains unknown. To assess the contribution of specific cell types to the formation of different N-terminally truncated Aβ peptides, supernatants from serum-free primary cell cultures of chicken neurons, astrocytes, and microglia, as well as human astrocytes, were analyzed by Aβ-ELISA and one- and two-dimensional SDS-urea polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis followed by immunoblot analysis. To evaluate the contribution of β- and γ-secretase to the generation of N-terminally modified Aβ, cultured astrocytes were treated with membrane-anchored "tripartite β-secretase (BACE1) inhibitors" and the γ-secretase inhibitor DAPT. Neurons, astrocytes, and microglia each exhibited cell type-specific patterns of secreted Aβ peptides. Neurons predominantly secreted Aβ peptides that begin at Asp1, whereas those released from astrocytes and microglia included high proportions of N-terminally modified Aβ peptides, presumably including Aβ 2/3-x and 4/5-x. The inhibition of BACE1 reduced the amount of Aβ 1-x in cell culture supernatants but not the amount of Aβ 2-x.

Number:  63
UID:  25143627
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction']
Abstract:  Antiretroviral therapy extends the lifespan of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected patients, but many survivors develop premature impairments in cognition. These residual cognitive impairments may involve aberrant deposition of amyloid β-peptides (Aβ). By unknown mechanisms, Aβ accumulates in the lysosomal and autophagic compartments of neurons in the HIV-infected brain. Here we identify the molecular events evoked by the HIV coat protein gp120 that facilitate the intraneuronal accumulation of Aβ. We created a triple transgenic gp120/APP/PS1 mouse that recapitulates intraneuronal deposition of Aβ in a manner reminiscent of the HIV-infected brain. In cultured neurons, we found that the HIV coat protein gp120 increased the transcriptional expression of BACE1 through repression of PPARγ, and increased APP expression by promoting interaction of the translation-activating RBP heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein C with APP mRNA. APP and BACE1 were colocalized into stabilized membrane microdomains, where the β-cleavage of APP and Aβ formation were enhanced. Aβ-peptides became localized to lysosomes that were engorged with sphingomyelin and calcium. Stimulating calcium efflux from lysosomes with a TRPM1 agonist promoted calcium efflux, luminal acidification, and cleared both sphingomyelin and Aβ from lysosomes. These findings suggest that therapeutics targeted to reduce lysosomal pH in neurodegenerative conditions may protect neurons by facilitating the clearance of accumulated sphingolipids and Aβ-peptides.

Number:  64
UID:  25136804
Founded words:  ['activate', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  The role of autophagy and its relationship with apoptosis in Alzheimer disease (AD) pathogenesis is poorly understood. Disruption of autophagy leads to buildup of incompletely digested substrates, amyloid-β (Aβ) peptide accumulation in vacuoles and cell death. Aβ, in turn, has been found to affect autophagy. Thus, Aβ might be part of a loop in which it is both the substrate of altered autophagy and its cause. Given the relevance of different soluble forms of Aβ1-42 in AD, we have investigated whether monomers and oligomers of the peptide have a differential role in causing altered autophagy and cell death. Using differentiated SK-N-BE neuroblastoma cells, we found that monomers hamper the formation of the autophagic BCL2-BECN1/Beclin 1 complex and activate the MAPK8/JNK1-MAPK9/JNK2 pathway phosphorylating BCL2. Monomers also inhibit apoptosis and allow autophagy with intracellular accumulation of autophagosomes and elevation of levels of BECN1 and LC3-II, resulting in an inhibition of substrate degradation due to an inhibitory action on lysosomal activity. Oligomers, in turn, favor the formation of the BCL2-BECN1 complex favoring apoptosis. In addition, they cause a less profound increase in BECN1 and LC3-II levels than monomers without affecting the autophagic flux. Thus, data presented in this work show a link for autophagy and apoptosis with monomers and oligomers, respectively. These studies are likely to help the design of novel disease modifying therapies.

Number:  65
UID:  25058312
Founded words:  ['associated', 'associated', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  In a previous work we have shown that exposure to aluminum (Al) chloride (AlCl3) enhanced the neurotoxicity of the amyloid beta(25-35) fragment (Abeta(25-35)) in neuroblastoma cells and affected the expression of Alzheimer's disease (AD)-related genes. Caffein, a compound endowed with beneficial effects against AD, exerts neuroprotection primarily through its antagonist activity on A2A adenosine receptors (A2AR), although it also inhibits A1Rs with similar potency. Still, studies on the specific involvement of these receptors in neuroprotection in a model of combined neurotoxicity (Abeta(25-35)+AlCl3) are missing. To address this issue, cultured SH-SY5Y cells exposed to Abeta(25-35)+AlCl3 were assessed for cell viability, morphology, intracellular ROS activity and expression of apoptosis-, stress- and AD-related proteins. To define the role of A1R and A2ARs, pretreatment with caffein, specific receptor antagonists (DPCPX or SCH58261) or siRNA-mediated gene knockdown were delivered. Results indicate that AlCl3 treatment exacerbated Abeta(25-35) toxicity, increased ROS production, lipid peroxidation, β-secretase-1 (BACE1) and amyloid precursor protein (APP). Interestingly, SCH58261 successfully prevented toxicity associated to Abeta(25-35) only, whereas pretreatment with both DPCPX and SCH58261 was required to fully avert Abeta(25-35)+AlCl3-induced damage, suggesting that A1Rs might also be critically involved in protection during combined toxicity. The effects of caffein were mimicked by both N-acetyl cysteine, an antioxidant, and desferrioxamine, likely acting through distinct mechanisms. Altogether, our data establish a novel protective function associated with A1R inhibition in the setting of combined Abeta(25-35)+AlCl3 neurotoxicity, and expand our current knowledge on the potential beneficial role of caffein to prevent AD progression in subjects environmentally exposed to aluminum.

Number:  66
UID:  24985735
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'association', 'interactions']
Abstract:  Formulations of cationic liposomes and polymers readily self-assemble by electrostatic interactions with siRNA to form cationic nanoparticles which achieve efficient transfection and silencing in vitro. However, the utility of cationic formulations in vivo is limited due to rapid clearance from the circulation, due to their association with serum proteins, as well as systemic and cellular toxicity. These problems may be overcome with anionic formulations but they provide challenges of self-assembly and transfection efficiency. We have developed anionic, siRNA nanocomplexes utilizing anionic PEGylated liposomes and cationic targeting peptides that overcome these problems. Biophysical measurements indicated that at optimal ratios of components, anionic PEGylated nanocomplexes formed spherical particles and that, unlike cationic nanocomplexes, were resistant to aggregation in the presence of serum, and achieved significant gene silencing although their non-PEGylated anionic counterparts were less efficient. We have evaluated the utility of anionic nanoparticles for the treatment of neuronal diseases by administration to rat brains of siRNA to BACE1, a key enzyme involved in the formation of amyloid plaques. Silencing of BACE1 was achieved in vivo following a single injection of anionic nanoparticles by convection enhanced delivery and specificity of RNA interference verified by 5' RACE-PCR and Western blot analysis of protein.

Number:  67
UID:  24958907
Founded words:  ['regulation', 'regulation']
Abstract:  Several microRNAs have been implicated in neurogenesis, neuronal differentiation, neurodevelopment, and memory. Development of miRNA-based therapeutics, however, needs tools for effective miRNA modulation, tissue-specific delivery, and in vivo evidence of functional effects following the knockdown of miRNA. Expression of miR-29a is reduced in patients and animal models of several neurodegenerative disorders, including Alzheimer's disease, Huntington's disease, and spinocerebellar ataxias. The temporal expression pattern of miR-29b during development also correlates with its protective role in neuronal survival. Here, we report the cellular and behavioral effect of in vivo, brain-specific knockdown of miR-29. We delivered specific anti-miRNAs to the mouse brain using a neurotropic peptide, thus overcoming the blood-brain-barrier and restricting the effect of knockdown to the neuronal cells. Large regions of the hippocampus and cerebellum showed massive cell death, reiterating the role of miR-29 in neuronal survival. The mice showed characteristic features of ataxia, including reduced step length. However, the apoptotic targets of miR-29, such as Puma, Bim, Bak, or Bace1, failed to show expected levels of up-regulation in mice, following knockdown of miR-29. In contrast, another miR-29 target, voltage-dependent anion channel1 (VDAC1), was found to be induced several fold in the hippocampus, cerebellum, and cortex of mice following miRNA knockdown. Partial restoration of apoptosis was achieved by down-regulation of VDAC1 in miR-29 knockdown cells. Our study suggests that regulation of VDAC1 expression by miR-29 is an important determinant of neuronal cell survival in the brain. Loss of miR-29 results in dysregulation of VDAC1, neuronal cell death, and an ataxic phenotype.

Number:  68
UID:  24935721
Founded words:  ['associated', 'mediated', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  Down syndrome (DS) is one of the most common genetic diseases. Patients with DS display growth delay and intellectual disabilities and develop Alzheimer's disease (AD) neuropathology after middle age, including neuritic plaques and neurofibrillary tangles. Beta-site amyloid β precursor protein (APP) cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1), essential for Aβ production and neuritic plaque formation, is elevated in DS patients. However, its homolog, β-site APP cleaving enzyme 2 (BACE2), functions as θ-secretase and plays a differential role in plaque formation. In this study, by using Two-dimensional sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (2D SDS-PAGE) and LC-MS/MS proteomic profiling analysis, we found that the SET oncogene protein (SET) expression was associated with BACE1 but not BACE2. SET protein was increased in BACE1 overexpressing cells and was markedly reduced in the BACE1 knockout mice. We found that the overexpression of BACE1 or SET significantly inhibited cell proliferation. Moreover, knockdown of SET in BACE1 overexpression cells significantly rescued BACE1-induced cell growth suppression. Furthermore, both BACE1 and SET protein levels were increased in Down syndrome patients. It suggests that BACE1 overexpression-induced SET upregulation may contribute to growth delay and cognitive impairment in DS patients. Our work provides a new insight that BACE1 overexpression not only promotes neuritic plaque formation but may also potentiate neurodegeneration mediated by SET elevation in Alzheimer-associated dementia in DS.

Number:  69
UID:  24907271
Founded words:  ['functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  BACE1 is a type I transmembrane aspartyl protease that cleaves amyloid precursor protein at the β-secretase site to initiate the release of β-amyloid peptide. As a secretase, BACE1 also cleaves additional membrane-bound molecules by exerting various cellular functions. In this study, we showed that BACE1 can effectively shed the membrane-anchored signaling molecule Jagged 1 (Jag1).Wealso mapped the cleavage sites of Jag1 by ADAM10 and ADAM17. Although Jag1 shares a high degree of homology with Jag2 in the ectodomain region, BACE1 fails to cleave Jag2 effectively, indicating a selective cleavage of Jag1. Abolished cleavage of Jag1 in BACE1-null mice leads to enhanced astrogenesis and, concomitantly, reduced neurogenesis. This characterization provides biochemical evidence that the Jag1-Notch pathway is under the control of BACE1 activity

Number:  70
UID:  24874077
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activates', 'regulator', 'regulate', 'regulated', 'regulates']
Abstract:  The aspartyl protease β-site AβPP-cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) catalyzes the rate-limiting step in Aβ production, a peptide at the nexus of neurodegenerative cascades in Alzheimer Disease (AD). The adipocytokine leptin has been demonstrated to reduce Aβ production and decrease BACE1 activity and expression levels. However, the signaling cascades involved in the leptin-induced mitigation in Aβ levels and BACE1 expression levels have not been elucidated. We have demonstrated that the transcription factor nuclear factor - kappa B (NF-κB) positively regulates BACE1 transcription. NF-κB activity is tightly regulated by the mammalian sirtuin SIRT1. Multiple studies have cogently evinced that leptin activates the metabolic master regulator SIRT1. In this study, we determined the extent to which SIRT1 expression and activity regulate the leptin-induced attenuation in BACE1 expression and Aβ levels in cultured human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells. This study also elucidated and delineated the signal transduction pathways involved in the leptin induced mitigation in BACE1 expression. Our results demonstrate for the first time that leptin attenuates the activation and transcriptional activity of NF-κB by reducing the acetylation of the p65 subunit in a SIRT1-dependent manner. Furthermore, our data shows that leptin reduces the NF-κB-mediated transcription of BACE1 and consequently reduces Amyloid-β genesis. Our study provides a valuable insight and a novel mechanism by which leptin reduces BACE1 expression and Amyloid-β production and may help design potential therapeutic interventions.

Number:  71
UID:  24866237
Founded words:  ['regulated']
Abstract:  Alzheimer's disease (AD) and a rare inherited disorder of cholesterol transport, Niemann-Pick type C (NPC) share several similarities including aberrant APP processing and increased Aβ production. Previously, we have shown that the AD-like phenotype in NPC model cells involves cholesterol-dependent enhanced APP cleavage by β-secretase and accumulation of both APP and BACE1 within endocytic compartments. Since retrograde transport of BACE1 from endocytic compartments to the trans-Golgi network (TGN) is regulated by the Golgi-localized γ-ear containing ADP ribosylation factor-binding protein 1 (GGA1), we analyzed in this work a potential role of GGA1 in the AD-like phenotype of NPC1-null cells. Overexpression of GGA1 caused a shift in APP processing towards the non-amyloidogenic pathway by increasing the localization of APP at the cell surface. However, the observed effect appear to be independent on the subcellular localization and phosphorylation state of BACE1. These findings show that the AD-like phenotype of NPC model cells can be partly reverted by promoting a non-amyloidogenic processing of APP through the upregulation of GGA1 supporting its preventive role against AD.

Number:  72
UID:  24844149
Founded words:  ['associated', 'regulator', 'regulate', 'functions', 'function', 'function', 'functions']
Abstract:  Alzheimer disease (AD) is associated with increased amyloidogenic processing of amyloid precursor protein (APP) to β-amyloid peptides (Aβ), cholinergic neuron loss with decreased choline acetyltransferase (ChAT) activity, and cognitive dysfunction. Both 69-kDa ChAT and 82-kDa ChAT are expressed in cholinergic neurons in human brain and spinal cord with 82-kDa ChAT localized predominantly to neuronal nuclei, suggesting potential alternative functional roles for the enzyme. By gene microarray analysis, we found that 82-kDa ChAT-expressing IMR32 neural cells have altered expression of genes involved in diverse cellular functions. Importantly, genes for several proteins that regulate APP processing along amyloidogenic and non-amyloidogenic pathways are differentially expressed in 82-kDa ChAT-containing cells. The predicted net effect based on observed changes in expression patterns of these genes would be decreased amyloidogenic APP processing with decreased Aβ production. This functional outcome was verified experimentally as a significant decrease in BACE1 protein levels and activity and a concomitant reduction in the release of endogenous Aβ1-42 from neurons cultured from brains of AD-model APP/PS1 transgenic mice. The expression of 82-kDa ChAT in neurons increased levels of GGA3, which is involved in trafficking BACE1 to lysosomes for degradation. shRNA-induced decreases in GGA3 protein levels attenuated the 82-kDa ChAT-mediated decreases in BACE1 protein and activity and Aβ1-42 release. Evidence that 82-kDa ChAT can enhance GGA3 gene expression is shown by enhanced GGA3 gene promoter activity in SN56 neural cells expressing this ChAT protein. These studies indicate a novel relationship between cholinergic neurons and APP processing, with 82-kDa ChAT acting as a negative regulator of Aβ production. This decreased formation of Aβ could result in protection for cholinergic neurons, as well as protection of other cells in the vicinity that are sensitive to increased levels of Aβ. Decreasing levels of 82-kDa ChAT due to increasing age or neurodegeneration could alter the balance towards increasing Aβ production, with this potentiating the decline in function of cholinergic neurons.

Number:  73
UID:  24720891
Founded words:  ['interacting', 'associated', 'interacting', 'mediated', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulator', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  Glycosylation is one of the major post-translational modifications, required for proper folding and functions of glycoproteins. N-glycosylation in ER is mediated by oligosaccharyltransferase (OST), an enzyme complex transferring preassembled oligosaccharide to asparagine residues of nascent polypeptide chain. Our study here indicates that regulator of calcineurin 1 (RCAN1) can enhance N-glycosylation in ER, therefore elevates the activities of β- and γ-secretase and markedly increases Aβ production. We found that RCAN1 stabilizes OST by interacting with OST component ribophorinI (RPN I). RCAN1 enhanced glycosylation of membrane proteins and glycosylation sequon GNSTVT, but has no effect on transferrin whose glycosylation was only affected by OST catalytic subunit STT3A, suggesting the effect of RCAN1 is associated with RPN I in facilitating substrate delivery. Our previous studies have shown that RCAN1 was increased in AD brains and RCAN1 overexpression induced neuronal apoptosis. Here our study showed that RCAN1 further contributes to AD pathogenesis by increasing N-glycosylation and Aβ production.

Number:  74
UID:  24612608
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'bind', 'bind', 'binds', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'bind', 'bind', 'mediate', 'mediated', 'mediated', 'mediate', 'functions', 'function', 'function', 'functions']
Abstract:  The β-site amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) is a protease that participates in the amyloidogenic cleavage of the Alzheimer amyloid precursor protein. Trafficking of BACE1 has been shown to be largely mediated by an acidic cluster dileucine motif in its cytoplasmic tail. This sorting signal functions both in endocytosis and endosomal sorting/recycling of BACE1 by providing a binding site for various sorting factors, such as the Golgi-localizing γ-ear containing ADP ribosylation factor binding (GGA) proteins that mediate BACE1 sorting within endosomes. Because flotillin-1 has been suggested to bind to BACE1 cytoplasmic tail, we analyzed the role of flotillins in BACE1 sorting. We show that flotillin-1 directly binds to the dileucine motif in the cytoplasmic tail of BACE1, whereas flotillin-2 binding is mainly mediated by its interaction with flotillin-1. Depletion of flotillins results in altered subcellular localization of BACE1 in endosomes and stabilization of BACE1 protein. Furthermore, amyloidogenic processing of Alzheimer amyloid precursor protein is increased. Flotillins compete with GGA proteins for binding to the dileucine motif in the BACE1 tail, suggesting that they play an important role in endosomal sorting of BACE1. The present study shows for the first time that flotillins are involved in endosomal sorting of BACE1. Because the endosomal localization of BACE1 affects its function as the β-secretase by increasing amyloidogenic processing of the amyloid precursor protein, flotillins may play a novel role in Alzheimer's disease. The present study is the first to show that flotillins bind to a canonical sorting signal and influence the binding of endosomal sorting factors onto cargo tails.

Number:  75
UID:  24566006
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activation']
Abstract:  Amyloid beta (Aβ) peptides, which are generated from amyloid precursor protein (APP), are thought to play a major role in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). This study investigated the anti-amyloidogenic effects of the ethanolic extract of Meliae Fructus (ID1201) using human embryonic kidney 293 cells with stably expressed human wild-type or Swedish mutant APP695 and β-secretase 1. ID1201 treatment enhanced the non-amyloidogenic metabolism of APP; increases in soluble APPα levels and decreases in soluble APPβ and Aβ levels resulted from the α-secretase activation through the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt pathway. In addition, ID1201-treated 5×familial AD (FAD) mice with 5 mutations in APP and presenilin 1 showed reduced levels of Aβ and amyloid plaques in the brain relative to those of 5×FAD mice with vehicle treatments. These results indicate that ID1201 possesses anti-amyloidogenic effects via the activation of the PI3K/Akt pathway, suggesting that it is a potential therapeutic agent for AD.

Number:  76
UID:  24547943
Founded words:  ['complexes', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complexes']
Abstract:  In this work, a peptide derived from the rabies virus glycoprotein (RVG) was linked to siRNA/trimethylated chitosan (TMC) complexes through bifunctional PEG for efficient brain-targeted delivery of siRNA. The physiochemical properties of the complexes, such as siRNA complexing ability, size and ζ potential, morphology, serum stability, and cytotoxicity, were investigated prior to studying the cellular uptake, in vitro gene silencing efficiency, and in vivo biodistribution. The RVG-peptide-linked siRNA/TMC-PEG complexes showed increased serum stability, negligible cytotoxicity, and higher cellular uptake than the unmodified siRNA/TMC-mPEG complexes in acetylcholine receptor positive Neuro2a cells. The potent knockdown of BACE1, a therapeutic target in Alzheimer's disease, demonstrated the gene silencing efficiency. In vivo imaging analysis showed significant accumulation of Cy5-siRNA in the isolated brain of mice injected with RVG-peptide-linked complexes. Therefore, the RVG-peptide-linked TMC-PEG developed in this study can be used as a potential carrier for delivery of siRNA to the brain.

Number:  77
UID:  24523906
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'mediated', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the leading cause of senile dementia in today's society. Its debilitating symptoms are manifested by disturbances in many important brain functions, which are influenced by adenosine. Hence, adenosinergic system is considered as a potential therapeutic target in AD treatment. In the present study, we found that sodium hydrosulfide (NaHS, an H2S donor, 100 µM) attenuated HENECA (a selective A2A receptor agonist, 10-200 nM) induced β-amyloid (1-42) (Aβ42) production in SH-SY5Y cells. NaHS also interfered with HENECA-stimulated production and post-translational modification of amyloid precursor protein (APP) by inhibiting its maturation. Measurement of the C-terminal APP fragments generated from its enzymatic cleavage by β-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) showed that NaHS did not have any significant effect on β-secretase activity. However, the direct measurements of HENECA-elevated γ-secretase activity and mRNA expressions of presenilins suggested that the suppression of Aβ42 production in NaHS pretreated cells was mediated by inhibiting γ-secretase. NaHS induced reductions were accompanied by similar decreases in intracellular cAMP levels and phosphorylation of cAMP responsive element binding protein (CREB). NaHS significantly reduced the elevated cAMP and Aβ42 production caused by forskolin (an adenylyl cyclase, AC agonist) alone or forskolin in combination with IBMX (a phosphodiesterase inhibitor), but had no effect on those caused by IBMX alone. Moreover, pretreatment with NaHS significantly attenuated HENECA-elevated AC activity and mRNA expressions of various AC isoforms. These data suggest that NaHS may preferentially suppress AC activity when it was stimulated. In conclusion, H2S attenuated HENECA induced Aβ42 production in SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells through inhibiting γ-secretase via a cAMP dependent pathway.

Number:  78
UID:  24516878
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  β-secretase (BACE-1) is a potential target for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Despite its potential, only few compounds targeting BACE have entered the clinical trials. Herein, we describe the identification of Gefitinib as a potential lead compound for BACE through an integrated approach of structural bioinformatics analysis, experimental assessment and computational analysis. In particular, we performed ELISA and western analysis to assess the effect of Gefitinib using N2a human APP695 cells. In addition, we investigated the binding mechanism of Gefitinib with BACE through molecular docking coupled with molecular dynamics simulations. The computational analyses revealed that hydrophobic contact is a major contributing factor to the binding of Gefitinib with BACE. The results obtained in the study have rendered Gefitinib as a putative lead compound for BACE. Further optimization studies are warranted to improve its potency and pharmacological properties against BACE for potential AD treatment.

Number:  79
UID:  24432380
Founded words:  ['associated']
Abstract:  Accumulation of β-amyloid peptide (Aβ) in the brain plays an important role in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Previous studies have demonstrated the neuroprotective role of osthole against oxygen and glucose deprivation in cortical neurons. However, the effects of osthole on Aβ-induced neurotoxicity in neural cells have rarely been reported. The current study was designed to investigate the protective effects of osthole on a cell model of AD insulted by exogenous Aβ25-35 and the potential mechanism(s). In this study, 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay, immunofluorescence analysis, apoptosis assay, reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) techniques were used in primary cortical neurons and SH-SY5Y cells. Our data showed that osthole reduced intracellular Aβ levels in neural cells, which was associated with decreased BACE1 protein; osthole reversed exogenous Aβ25-35-induced cell viability loss, apoptosis, and synapsin-1 reduction, which was related to the reestablishment of phosphorylation of cyclic AMP response element-binding protein (CREB). The collective evidence indicates that osthole possesses the ability to protect cortical neurons and SH-SY5Y cells against Aβ injury, and the underlying mechanism may be attributed to the enhancement of CREB phosphorylation.

Number:  80
UID:  24397738
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  In an attempt to increase selectivity vs Cathepsin D (CatD) in our BACE1 program, a series of 1,3,4,4a,10,10a-hexahydropyrano[4,3-b]chromene analogues was developed. Three different Asp-binding moieties were examined: spirocyclic acyl guanidines, aminooxazolines, and aminothiazolines in order to modulate potency, selectivity, efflux, and permeability. Using structure-based design, substitutions to improve binding to both the S3 and S2' sites of BACE1 were explored. An acyl guanidine moiety provided the most potent analogues. These compounds demonstrated 10-420 fold selectivity for BACE1 vs CatD, and were highly potent in a cell assay measuring Aβ1-40 production (5-99 nM). They also suffered from high efflux. Despite this undesirable property, two of the acyl guanidines achieved free brain concentrations (Cfree,brain) in a guinea pig PD model sufficient to cover their cell IC50s. Moreover, a significant reduction of Aβ1-40 in guinea pig, rat, and cyno CSF (58%, 53%, and 63%, respectively) was observed for compound 62.

Number:  81
UID:  24376644
Founded words:  ['associated', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by the buildup of amyloid-β peptides (Aβ) aggregates derived from proteolytic processing of the β-amyloid precursor protein (APP). Amyloidogenic cleavage of APP by β-secretase/BACE1 generates the C-terminal fragment C99/CTFβ that can be subsequently cleaved by γ-secretase to produce Aβ. Growing evidence indicates that high levels of C99/CTFβ are determinant for AD. Although it has been postulated that γ-secretase-independent pathways must control C99/CTFβ levels, the contribution of organelles with degradative functions, such as the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) or lysosomes, is unclear. In this report, we investigated the turnover and amyloidogenic processing of C99/CTFβ in human H4 neuroglioma cells, and found that C99/CTFβ is localized at the Golgi apparatus in contrast to APP, which is mostly found in endosomes. Conditions that localized C99/CTFβ to the ER resulted in its degradation in a proteasome-dependent manner that first required polyubiquitination, consistent with an active role of the ER associated degradation (ERAD) in this process. Furthermore, when proteasomal activity was inhibited C99/CTFβ was degraded in a chloroquine (CQ)-sensitive compartment, implicating lysosomes as alternative sites for its degradation. Our results highlight a crosstalk between degradation pathways within the ER and lysosomes to avoid protein accumulation and toxicity.

Number:  82
UID:  24361992
Founded words:  ['functions', 'function', 'function', 'functions']
Abstract:  Neurodegenerative plaques characteristic of Alzheimer's disease (AD) are composed of amyloid beta (Aβ) peptide, which is proteolyzed from amyloid precursor protein (APP) by β-secretase (beta-site APP cleaving enzyme [BACE1]) and γ-secretase. Although γ-secretase has essential functions across metazoans, no essential roles have been identified for BACE1 or Aβ. Because their only known function results in a disease phenotype, we sought to understand these components from an evolutionary perspective. We show that APP-like proteins are found throughout most animal taxa, but sequences homologous to Aβ are not found outside gnathostomes and the β cut site is only conserved within sarcopterygians. BACE1 enzymes, however, extend through basal chordates and as far as cnidaria. We then sought to determine whether BACE1 from a species that never evolved Aβ could proteolyze APP substrates that include Aβ. We demonstrate that BACE1 from a basal chordate is a functional ortholog that can liberate Aβ from full-length human APP, indicating BACE1 activity evolved at least 360 My before Aβ.

Number:  83
UID:  24333289
Founded words:  ['regulators']
Abstract:  We characterized and present the BE(2)-M17 human neuroblastoma cell line as a novel in vitro model of the APP-cleavage cascade to support future (1) functional studies of molecular regulators in Aβ production, and (2) high-throughput screening assays of new pharmacotherapeutics.

Number:  84
UID:  24333289
Founded words:  ['regulatory', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  Our evidence supports the use of BE(2)-M17 as a novel, human, cell-based model of the APP processing pathway that offers a potential streamlined approach to dissect molecular functions of endogenous regulatory pathways, and perform mechanistic studies to identify modulators of Aβ production.

Number:  85
UID:  24304299
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  The β-secretase or β-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) is the enzyme responsible for the formation of amyloid-β peptides, which have a major role in Alzheimer pathogenesis. BACE1 has a transmembrane sequence (TMS), which makes it unique among related proteases. We noticed that the BACE1 TMS contains an uncommon sulfur-rich motif. The sequence MxxxCxxxMxxxCxMxC spans the entire TMS, resembles metal ion binding motifs, and is highly conserved among homologues. We used a synthetic 31-mer model peptide comprising the TMS to study metal ion binding and oligomerization. Applying diverse biochemical and biophysical techniques, we detected dimer and trimer formation of the TMS peptide with copper ions. Replacement of the central Cys466 by Ala essentially abolished these effects. We show that the peptide undergoes a redox reaction with copper ions resulting in a disulfide bridge involving Cys466. Further, we find peptide trimerization that depends on the presence of monovalent copper ions and the sulfhydryl group of Cys466. We identified Cys466 as a key residue for metal ion chelation and to be the core of an oligomerization motif of the BACE1-TMS peptide. Our results demonstrate a novel metal ion controlled oligomerization of the BACE1 TMS, which could have an enormous therapeutic importance against Alzheimer disease.

Number:  86
UID:  24295810
Founded words:  ['activating', 'activating']
Abstract:  Amyloid beta (Aβ) peptides are key molecules in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). The sequential cleavage of amyloid precursor protein (APP) by the β- and γ-secretases generates Aβ peptides; however, the alternate cleavage of APP by the α- and γ-secretases decreases Aβ production. We previously reported that carnosic acid (CA), a phenolic diterpene compound found in the labiate herbs rosemary and sage, suppresses Aβ (1-40 and 1-42) production by activating α-secretase in cultured SH-SY5Y human neuroblastoma cells (Neurosci. Res. 2013; 75: 94-102). Here, we investigated the effect of CA on the production of Aβ peptides (1-40, 1-42 and 1-43) in U373MG human astrocytoma cells. The treatment of cells with CA suppressed Aβ40/42/43 release (55-71% decrease at 50μM). CA treatment enhanced the mRNA expressions of an α-secretase TACE (tumor necrosis factor-α-converting enzyme, also called a disintegrin and metalloproteinase-17, ADAM17); however, the β-secretase BACE1 (β-site APP-cleaving enzyme-1) was not increased by CA. Knockdown of TACE by siRNA reduced soluble-APPα release enhanced by CA and partially recovered the CA-suppressed Aβ40/42/43 release. These results suggest that CA reduces Aβ production, at least partially, by activating TACE in human astroglial cells. The use of CA may have a potential in the prevention of Aβ-mediated diseases.

Number:  87
UID:  24125881
Founded words:  ['bind', 'bind']
Abstract:  The glycopolymers for glycosaminoglycan mimic were synthesized, and the inhibitory effects of Alzheimer's β-secretase (BACE-1) were examined. The regio-selective sulfation was conducted on N-acetyl glucosamine (GlcNAc), and the acrylamide derivatives were synthesized with the consequent sulfated GlcNAc. The glycopolymers were synthesized with acrylamide using radical initiator. The glycopolymer with sulfated GlcNAc showed the strong inhibitory effect on BACE-1, and the inhibitory effects were dependent on the sulfation positions. Especially, glycopolymers carrying 3,4,6-O-sulfo-GlcNAc showed the strong inhibitory effect. The docking simulation suggested that glycopolymers bind to the active site of BACE-1.

Number:  88
UID:  24121518
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Implicit solvation methods such as MM-GBSA, when applied to evaluating protein/ligand binding free energies, are widely believed to be accurate only for the estimation of relative binding free energies for a congeneric series of ligands. In this work, we show that the MM-GBSA flavor of Prime 3.0, VSGB-2.0, with a variable dielectric model and a novel energy function, could be approaching the accuracy required for evaluating absolute binding free energies, albeit, through a linear regression fit. The data-set used for validation includes 106 protein-ligand complexes that were carefully selected to control for variability in the affinity data as well as error in the modeled complexes. Through systematic analysis, we also quantify the degradation in the R(2) of fit between experimental and calculated values with either greater variability in the affinity data or an increase in error in the modeled protein/ligand complexes. Limitations for its application in drug discovery are discussed along with the identification of areas for future development.

Number:  89
UID:  24113238
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'association', 'interactions', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  Alzheimer disease (AD) is a neuronal dementia for which no treatment has been consolidated yet. Major pathologic hallmark of AD is the aggregated extracellular amyloid-β plaques in the brains of disease sufferers. Aβ-peptide is a major component of amyloid plaques and is produced from amyloid precursor protein (APP) via the proteolysis action. An aspartyl protease known as β-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme (BACE-1) is responsible for this proteolytic action. Distinctive role of BACE-1 in AD pathogenesis has made it a validated target to develop anti-Alzheimer agents. Our structure-based virtual screening method led to the synthesis of novel 3,5-bis-N-(aryl/heteroaryl) carbamoyl-4-aryl-1,4-dihydropyridine BACE-1 inhibitors (6a-6p; in vitro hits). Molecular docking and DFT-based ab initio studies using B3LYP functional in association with triple-ζ basis set (TZV) proposed binding mode and binding energies of ligands in the active site of the receptor. In vitro BACE-1 inhibitory activities were determined by enzymatic fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) assay. Most of the synthesized dihydropyridine scaffolds were active against BACE-1 while 6d, 6k, 6n and 6a were found to be the most potent molecules with IC50 values of 4.21, 4.27, 4.66 and 6.78 μM, respectively. Superior BACE-1 inhibitory activities were observed for dihydropyridine derivatives containing fused/nonfused thiazole containing groups, possibly attributing to the additional interactions with S2-S3 subpocket residues. Relatively reliable correlation between calculated binding energies and experimental BACE-1 inhibitory activities was achieved (R(2)=0.51). Moreover, compounds 6d, 6k, 6n and 6a exhibited relatively no calcium channel blocking activity with regard to nifedipine suggesting them as appropriate candidates for further modification(s) to BACE-1 inhibitory scaffolds.

Number:  90
UID:  24081378
Founded words:  ['associated']
Abstract:  β-Secretase-1 (BACE1) is the rate-limiting enzyme for the genesis of amyloid-β (Aβ) peptides, the main constituents of the amyloid plaques in the brains of Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients. BACE1 is being evaluated as an anti-Aβ target for AD therapy. Recent studies indicate that BACE1 elevation is associated with axonal and presynaptic pathology during plaque development. Evidence also points to a biological role for BACE1 in axonal outgrowth and synapse formation during development. Axonal, including presynaptic, pathology exists in AD as well as many other neurological disorders such as Parkinson's disease, epilepsy, stroke, and trauma. In this review, we discuss pharmaceutical BACE1 inhibition as a therapeutic option for axonal pathogenesis, in addition to amyloid pathology. We first introduce the amyloidogenic processing of amyloid-β protein precursor and describe the normal expression pattern of the amyloidogenic proteins in the brain, with an emphasis on BACE1. We then address BACE1 elevation relative to amyloid plaque development, followed by updating recent understanding of a neurotrophic role of BACE1 in axon and synapse development. We further elaborate the occurrence of axonal pathology in some other neurological conditions. Finally, we propose pharmacological inhibition of excessive BACE1 activity as an option to mitigate early axonal pathology occurring in AD and other neurological disorders.

Number:  91
UID:  24051074
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  For further investigation of BACE1 inhibitors using conformational restriction with sp(3) hybridized carbon, we applied this approach to 6-substituted aminopyrimidone derivatives 3 to improve the inhibitory activity by reducing the entropic energy loss upon binding to BACE1. Among eight stereoisomers synthesized, [trans-(1'R,2'R),6S] isomer 6 exhibited the best BACE1 inhibitory activity, which was statistically superior to that of the corresponding ethylene linker compound (R)-3. Combinational examinations of the binding mode of 6 were performed, which included isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC), X-ray crystallographic structure analysis and theoretical calculations, to clarify the effect of our conformational restriction approach. From the ITC measurement, the binding entropy of 6 was found to be ∼0.5kcal larger than that of (R)-3, which is considered to be affected by conformational restriction with a cyclopropane ring.

Number:  92
UID:  24009667
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulated', 'regulated']
Abstract:  Epithelial cell adhesion molecule EpCAM is a transmembrane glycoprotein, which is highly and frequently expressed in carcinomas and (cancer-)stem cells, and which plays an important role in the regulation of stem cell pluripotency. We show here that murine EpCAM (mEpCAM) is subject to regulated intramembrane proteolysis in various cells including embryonic stem cells and teratocarcinomas. As shown with ectopically expressed EpCAM variants, cleavages occur at α-, β-, γ-, and ε-sites to generate soluble ectodomains, soluble Aβ-like-, and intracellular fragments termed mEpEX, mEp-β, and mEpICD, respectively. Proteolytic sites in the extracellular part of mEpCAM were mapped using mass spectrometry and represent cleavages at the α- and β-sites by metalloproteases and the b-secretase BACE1, respectively. Resulting C-terminal fragments (CTF) are further processed to soluble Aβ-like fragments mEp-β and cytoplasmic mEpICD variants by the g-secretase complex. Noteworthy, cytoplasmic mEpICD fragments were subject to efficient degradation in a proteasome-dependent manner. In addition the γ-secretase complex dependent cleavage of EpCAM CTF liberates different EpICDs with different stabilities towards proteasomal degradation. Generation of CTF and EpICD fragments and the degradation of hEpICD via the proteasome were similarly demonstrated for the human EpCAM ortholog. Additional EpCAM orthologs have been unequivocally identified in silico in 52 species. Sequence comparisons across species disclosed highest homology of BACE1 cleavage sites and in presenilin-dependent γ-cleavage sites, whereas strongest heterogeneity was observed in metalloprotease cleavage sites. In summary, EpCAM is a highly conserved protein present in fishes, amphibians, reptiles, birds, marsupials, and placental mammals, and is subject to shedding, γ-secretase-dependent regulated intramembrane proteolysis, and proteasome-mediated degradation.

Number:  93
UID:  24005676
Founded words:  ['regulator', 'regulated', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  BACE1 is the sole enzyme responsible for cleaving amyloid precursor protein at the β-secretase site, and this cleavage initiates the generation of β-amyloid peptide (Aβ). Because amyloid precursor protein is predominantly expressed by neurons and deposition of Aβ aggregates in the human brain is highly correlated with the Aβ released at axonal terminals, we focused our investigation of BACE1 localization on the neuritic region. We show that BACE1 was not only enriched in the late Golgi, trans-Golgi network, and early endosomes but also in both axons and dendrites. BACE1 was colocalized with the presynaptic vesicle marker synaptophysin, indicating the presence of BACE1 in synapses. Because the excessive release of Aβ from synapses is attributable to an increase in amyloid deposition, we further explored whether the presence of BACE1 in synapses was regulated by reticulon 3 (RTN3), a protein identified previously as a negative regulator of BACE1. We found that RTN3 is not only localized in the endoplasmic reticulum but also in neuritic regions where no endoplasmic reticulum-shaping proteins are detected, implicating additional functions of RTN3 in neurons. Coexpression of RTN3 with BACE1 in cultured neurons was sufficient to reduce colocalization of BACE1 with synaptophysin. This reduction correlated with decreased anterograde transport of BACE1 in axons in response to overexpressed RTN3. Our results in this study suggest that altered RTN3 levels can impact the axonal transport of BACE1 and demonstrate that reducing axonal transport of BACE1 in axons is a viable strategy for decreasing BACE1 in axonal terminals and, perhaps, reducing amyloid deposition.

Number:  94
UID:  24004830
Founded words:  ['interact', 'interact', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  The β-enzyme (BACE), which takes an active part in the processing of amyloid precursor protein, thereby leads to the production of amyloid-β (Aβ) in the brain, is a major therapeutic target against Alzheimer's disease. The present study is aimed at studying 3D-QSAR of BACE-1 inhibitors and their binding mode. We build a 3D-QSAR model involving 99 training BACE-1 inhibitors based on Topomer CoMFA, and 26 molecules are employed to validate the external predictive power of the model obtained. The multiple correlation coefficients of fitting modeling, leave one out cross validation, and external validation are 0.966, 0.767 and 0.784, respectively. Topomer search is used as a tool for virtual screening in lead-like compounds of ZINC databases (2012); as a result, we successfully design 30 new molecules with higher activity than that of all training and test inhibitors. Besides, Surflex-dock is employed to explore binding mode of the inhibitors studied when acting with BACE-1 enzyme. The result shows that the inhibitors closely interact with the key sites related to ASP93, THR133, GLN134, ASP289, GLY291, THR292, THR293, ASN294, ARG296 and SER386 of BACE-1.

Number:  95
UID:  23998983
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulate', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  β-Secretase (BACE1) is a membrane-anchored pepsin-like aspartic protease and is the rate-limiting enzyme in the β-amyloidogenic pathway. Thus, inhibitors of BACE1 activity have therapeutic potential for Alzheimer's disease. While much effort has focused on small molecule active site inhibitors, recent exploration of BACE1 inhibition by peptides and antibodies has revealed exosites that can regulate enzymatic activity. This type of allosteric regulation by proteinaceous factors, while frequently found in serine and cysteine proteases, is rarely seen in aspartic proteases. A crystal structure of the anti-BACE1/enzyme complex shows altered structural features and dynamic characteristics near the substrate-binding cleft. This binding mode, along with the enzymatic inhibition pattern, suggests that anti-BACE1 functions through an allosteric inhibition mechanism.

Number:  96
UID:  23993670
Founded words:  ['interacted', 'interacted', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  We have reported potent peptidic and non-peptidic BACE1 inhibitors with a hydroxymethylcarbonyl (HMC) isostere as a substrate transition-state mimic. However, our potent inhibitors possess a tetrazole ring at the P1' position. It is desirable that central nervous system (CNS) drugs do not possess an acidic moiety. In this study, we synthesized non-acidic BACE1 inhibitors with heterocyclic derivatives at the P1' position. KMI-1764 (27) exhibited potent inhibitory activity (IC50=27nM). Interestingly, these non-acidic inhibitors tended to follow the quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR) equation and interacted with BACE1-Arg235 in the binding model.

Number:  97
UID:  23988410
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  We recently discovered and reported dual inhibitor 5 of AChE and BACE1 with N-benzylpiperidine ethyl as C-terminus. Compound 5 showed potent inhibitory activities for BACE1, and could reduce endogenous Aβ1-40 production in APP transgenic mice. In present work, we rapidly identified substituted triazole as the C-terminus of compound 5 by replacing the benzylpiperidine ethyl group with click chemistry and tested these synthesized compounds by in situ screening assay. As revealed by the crystal structures of BACE1 in complex with our triazole compound 12, we found that Pro70 and Thr72 located in the flap region were the critical components for binding with these inhibitors. With the aid of the crystal structure, a new series of five-membered heterocyclic compounds was prepared in order to explore the structure-activity relationship (SAR) of this class of molecules. From these efforts, pyrazole was discovered as a novel C-terminus of BACE1 inhibitors. After further modification of pyrazole with variable substituents, compound 37 exhibited good potency in enzyme inhibition assay (IC50=0.025 μM) and compound 33 showed moderate inhibition effects on Aβ production of APP transfected HEK293 cells. Moreover, these pyrazole derivatives demonstrated good selectivity versus cathepsin D. Our results indicated that the vicinity of Pro70 and Thr72 might be utilized as a subsite, and the discovered pyrazole derivatives might provide useful hints for developing novel BACE1 inhibitors as anti-AD drugs.

Number:  98
UID:  23959870
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'associated', 'interaction']
Abstract:  Whereas amyloid-β (Aβ) accumulates in the brain of normal animals dosed with low levels of copper (Cu), the mechanism is not completely known. Cu could contribute to Aβ accumulation by altering its clearance and/or its production. Because Cu homeostasis is altered in transgenic mice overexpressing Aβ precursor protein (APP), the objective of this study was to elucidate the mechanism of Cu-induced Aβ accumulation in brains of normal mice and then to explore Cu's effects in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease. In aging mice, accumulation of Cu in brain capillaries was associated with its reduction in low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1), an Aβ transporter, and higher brain Aβ levels. These effects were reproduced by chronic dosing with low levels of Cu via drinking water without changes in Aβ synthesis or degradation. In human brain endothelial cells, Cu, at its normal labile levels, caused LRP1-specific down-regulation by inducing its nitrotyrosination and subsequent proteosomal-dependent degradation due in part to Cu/cellular prion protein/LRP1 interaction. In APP(sw/0) mice, Cu not only down-regulated LRP1 in brain capillaries but also increased Aβ production and neuroinflammation because Cu accumulated in brain capillaries and, unlike in control mice, in the parenchyma. Thus, we have demonstrated that Cu's effect on brain Aβ homeostasis depends on whether it is accumulated in the capillaries or in the parenchyma. These findings should provide unique insights into preventative and/or therapeutic approaches to control neurotoxic Aβ levels in the aging brain.

Number:  99
UID:  23947643
Founded words:  ['function', 'function']
Abstract:  Alois Alzheimer identified first abnormal deformation in the brain of diseased people with mental disorder. The disorder is clinically characterized by a progression from episodic memory problems to a slow global decline of cognitive function, ending with the final stage when patients become bedridden and death occurs on average 9 years after diagnosis. The current standard of care does not cover the approved and effective treatment of both cognitive and non-cognitive symptoms. Tremendous effort was put in investigation of the disease development. The uncovered molecular mechanism shed light on aspartic proteases, the smallest protease class with about 15 members in the human genome. Here we summarise the most important structure-based developments on one of the most popular aspartic protease target BACE1.

Number:  100
UID:  23879547
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interactions', 'binding', 'binding', 'binders', 'binders', 'binding', 'binding', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  A molecular modeling study giving structural, functional, and mutagenesis insights into the anti-BACE1 Fab fragment that recognizes the BACE1 exosite is reported. Our results allow extending experimental data resulting from X-ray diffraction experiments in order to examine unknown aspects for the Fab-BACE1 recognition and its binding mode. Thus, the study performed here allows extending the inherently static nature of crystallographic structures in order to gain a deeper understanding of the structural and dynamical basis at the atomic level. The characteristics and strength of the interatomic interactions involved in the immune complex formation are exhaustively analyzed. The results might explain how the anti-BACE1 Fab fragment and other BACE1 exosite binders are capable to produce an allosteric modulation of the BACE1 activity. Our site-directed mutagenesis study indicated that the functional anti-BACE1 paratope, residues Tyr32 (H1), Trp50 (H2), Arg98 (H3), Phe101 (H3), Trp104 (H3) and Tyr94 (L3), strongly dominates the binding energetics with the BACE1 exosite. The mutational studies described in this work might accelerate the development of new BACE1 exosite binders with interesting pharmacological activity.

Number:  101
UID:  23867794
Founded words:  ['associated', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Early-life lead (Pb) exposure induces overexpression of the amyloid beta precursor protein and its amyloid beta product in older rats and primates. We exposed rodents to Pb during different life span periods and examined cognitive function in old age and its impact on biomarkers associated with Alzheimer's disease (AD).

Number:  102
UID:  23831026
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interaction', 'interactions', 'interaction', 'regulates', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  BACE1 is the sole secretase for generating β-amyloid (Aβ) in vivo and is being actively pursued as a drug target for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease. Transmembrane BACE1 exerts its biological activity by cleaving its membrane-bound cellular substrates. Here, we reveal that BACE1 directly regulates the level of membrane-anchored full-length Jagged1 (Jag1), a signaling molecule important for the control of neurogenesis and astrogenesis, via interaction with its cognate Notch receptor. We show that shedding of Jag1 is reduced in BACE1 null mice and upregulated Jag1 enhances Notch signaling via cell-cell juxtacrine interactions. Additional biochemical assays confirmed that overexpression of BACE1 enhanced cleavage of Jag1. Consequently, BACE1 null mice exhibit a significant increase in astrogenesis with a corresponding decrease in neurogenesis in their hippocampi during early development. Hence, BACE1 appears to function as a signaling protease that controls the balance of neurogenesis and astrogenesis via the Jag1-Notch pathway.

Number:  103
UID:  23816176
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interaction', 'interactions', 'interaction', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  BACE1, a β secretase candidate enzyme, initiates the Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathogenesis via amyloid β (Aβ) peptide production serving as a potential therapeutic target. Previous experimental evidence suggested that ginsenosides, a key component of Panax ginseng, are effective against AD. In this study, we implemented a molecular modeling method to reveal the inhibitory action of ginsenosides on BACE1 activity. We selected 12 ginsenosides and performed molecular docking studies to evaluate its interaction with the BACE1 active site, which is essential for inhibition. Further ADMET filtration was applied to find drug-like molecules with a specific ability to cross blood brain barrier (BBB), and to determine toxicity. The BACE1-ginsenosides complex was further subjected to a molecular dynamics simulation to study the stability of the complex and its hydrogen bond interactions. In summary, our findings show ginsenosides CK, F1, Rh1 and Rh2 are potential BACE1 inhibitors from Panax ginseng.

Number:  104
UID:  23791884
Founded words:  ['regulate', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  With the development of whole genome and transcriptome sequencing technologies, long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) have received increased attention. Multiple studies indicate that lncRNAs act not only as the intermediary between DNA and protein but also as important protagonists of cellular functions. LncRNAs can regulate gene expression in many ways, including chromosome remodeling, transcription and post-transcriptional processing. Moreover, the dysregulation of lncRNAs has increasingly been linked to many human diseases, especially in cancers. Here, we reviewed the rapidly advancing field of lncRNAs and described the relationship between the dysregulation of lncRNAs and human diseases, highlighting the specific roles of lncRNAs in human diseases.

Number:  105
UID:  23773724
Founded words:  ['associated', 'regulated']
Abstract:  β-Secretase (BACE1) cleavage of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) represents the initial step in the formation of the Alzheimer's disease associated amyloidogenic Aβ peptide. Substantive evidence indicates that APP processing by BACE1 is dependent on intracellular sorting of this enzyme. Nonetheless, knowledge of the intracellular trafficking pathway of internalised BACE1 remains in doubt. Here we show that cell surface BACE1 is rapidly internalised by the AP2/clathrin dependent pathway in transfected cells and traffics to early endosomes and Rab11-positive, juxtanuclear recycling endosomes, with very little transported to the TGN as has been previously suggested. Moreover, BACE1 is predominantly localised to the early and recycling endosome compartments in different cell types, including neuronal cells. In contrast, the majority of internalised wild-type APP traffics to late endosomes/lysosomes. To explore the relevance of the itinerary of BACE1 on APP processing, we generated a BACE1 chimera containing the cytoplasmic tail of TGN38 (BACE/TGN38), which cycles between the cell surface and TGN in an AP2-dependent manner. Wild-type BACE1 is less efficient in Aβ production than the BACE/TGN38 chimera, highlighting the relevance of the itinerary of BACE1 on APP processing. Overall the data suggests that internalised BACE1 and APP diverge at early endosomes and that Aβ biogenesis is regulated in part by the recycling itinerary of BACE1.

Number:  106
UID:  23769639
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interactions', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  We describe a systematic study of how macrocyclization in the P₁-P₃ region of hydroxyethylamine-based inhibitors of β-site amyloid precursor protein (APP)-cleaving enzyme (BACE1) modulates in vitro activity. This study reveals that in a number of instances macrocyclization of bis-terminal dienes leads to improved potency toward BACE1 and selectivity against cathepsin D (CatD), as well as greater amyloid β-peptide (Aβ)-lowering activity in HEK293T cells stably expressing APPSW. However, for several closely related analogs the benefits of macrocyclization are attenuated by the effects of other structural features in different regions of the molecules. X-ray crystal structures of three of these novel macrocyclic inhibitors bound to BACE1 revealed their binding conformations and interactions with the enzyme.

Number:  107
UID:  23756188
Founded words:  ['regulate', 'functions', 'function', 'function', 'functions']
Abstract:  Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been attracting immense research interest, while only a handful of lncRNAs have been characterized thoroughly. Their involvement in the fundamental cellular processes including regulate gene expression at epigenetics, transcription, and post-transcription highlighted a central role in cell homeostasis. However, lncRNAs studies are still at a relatively early stage, their definition, conservation, functions, and action mechanisms remain fairly complicated. Here, we give a systematic and comprehensive summary of the existing knowledge of lncRNAs in order to provide a better understanding of this new studying field. lncRNAs play important roles in brain development, neuron function and maintenance, and neurodegenerative diseases are becoming increasingly evident. In this review, we also highlighted recent studies related lncRNAs in central nervous system (CNS) development and neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease (PD), Huntington's disease (HD) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), and elucidated some specific lncRNAs which may be important for understanding the pathophysiology of neurodegenerative diseases, also have the potential as therapeutic targets.

Number:  108
UID:  23754390
Founded words:  ['associated']
Abstract:  Amyloids are often associated with pathologic processes such as in Alzheimer's disease (AD), but can also underlie physiological processes such as pigmentation. Formation of pathological and functional amyloidogenic substrates can require precursor processing by proteases, as exemplified by the generation of Aβ peptide from amyloid precursor protein (APP) by beta-site APP cleaving enzyme (BACE)1 and γ-secretase. Proteolytic processing of the pigment cell-specific Melanocyte Protein (PMEL) is also required to form functional amyloid fibrils during melanogenesis, but the enzymes involved are incompletely characterized. Here we show that the BACE1 homologue BACE2 processes PMEL to generate functional amyloids. BACE2 is highly expressed in pigment cells and Bace2(-/-) but not Bace1(-/-) mice display coat color defects, implying a specific role for BACE2 during melanogenesis. By using biochemical and morphological analyses, combined with RNA silencing, pharmacologic inhibition, and BACE2 overexpression in a human melanocytic cell line, we show that BACE2 cleaves the integral membrane form of PMEL within the juxtamembrane domain, releasing the PMEL luminal domain into endosomal precursors for the formation of amyloid fibrils and downstream melanosome morphogenesis. These studies identify an amyloidogenic substrate of BACE2, reveal an important physiological role for BACE2 in pigmentation, and highlight analogies in the generation of PMEL-derived functional amyloids and APP-derived pathological amyloids.

Number:  109
UID:  23701002
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'interacts', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interacts', 'mediate', 'mediate']
Abstract:  BRI2, a protein mutated in Familial British and Familial Danish Dementias, interacts with Amyloid Precursor Protein (APP) and reduces the levels of secreted APPβ (sAPPβ), which derives from APP cleavage by β-secretase (BACE1). Exploring the mechanisms of this effect, we obtained data that BRI2 decreases the cellular levels of BACE1 thus reducing the β-cleavage of APP. Deletion of N-terminal cytoplasmic or C-terminal extracellular sequences of BRI2 neither affected its interaction with BACE1 or APP (Fotinopoulou et al., 2005) nor the reduction in the levels of BACE1 and sAPPβ. These results suggest that BRI2 may prevent access of BACE1 to APP and the BRI2/BACE1 interaction may mediate the reduction in BACE1 levels. In support, BRI2 expression induced lysosomal but not proteasomal degradation of BACE1. In parallel, BRI2 expression was also found to reduce BACE1 mRNA levels by 50%. This study adds novel information regarding the mechanism by which BRI2 affects APP processing and BACE1 levels.

Number:  110
UID:  23695257
Founded words:  ['binders']
Abstract:  The aspartic protease BACE2 is responsible for the shedding of the transmembrane protein Tmem27 from the surface of pancreatic β-cells, which leads to inactivation of the β-cell proliferating activity of Tmem27. This role of BACE2 in the control of β-cell maintenance suggests BACE2 as a drug target for diabetes. Inhibition of BACE2 has recently been shown to lead to improved control of glucose homeostasis and to increased insulin levels in insulin-resistant mice. BACE2 has 52% sequence identity to the well studied Alzheimer's disease target enzyme β-secretase (BACE1). High-resolution BACE2 structures would contribute significantly to the investigation of this enzyme as either a drug target or anti-target. Surface mutagenesis, BACE2-binding antibody Fab fragments, single-domain camelid antibody VHH fragments (Xaperones) and Fyn-kinase-derived SH3 domains (Fynomers) were used as crystallization helpers to obtain the first high-resolution structures of BACE2. Eight crystal structures in six different packing environments define an ensemble of low-energy conformations available to the enzyme. Here, the different strategies used for raising and selecting BACE2 binders for cocrystallization are described and the crystallization success, crystal quality and the time and resources needed to obtain suitable crystals are compared.

Number:  111
UID:  23682800
Founded words:  ['associated']
Abstract:  RNA interference (RNAi) technology provides a powerful, yet selective, molecular tool to reduce the expression of genes in eukaryotic cells. Despite the success associated with the effective use of siRNA duplexes for gene silencing, there is a need to improve their properties. These properties, related mainly to migration through the cell membranes, stability of siRNA in vivo, and specificity of their silencing activity, can be improved by chemical modifications of siRNA backbone. In this study, we examined the physicochemical and biological properties of siRNA duplexes targeted against BACE1 gene modified at various positions with a lipophilic boron cluster (C2B10H11, CB). The lipophilicity and resistance to enzymatic degradation of the modified oligomers was higher than the unmodified counterparts. As measured in a dual fluorescence assay (BACE1-GFP/RFP), the carboranyl siRNAs (CB-siRNAs) were as active as the parent nonmodified duplexes and their toxicity toward HeLa cells was also similar. The helical structure of CB-siRNAs remained unchanged upon boron cluster introduction, as determined by CD and UV melting experiments.

Number:  112
UID:  23681056
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  Proteolytic cleavage of amyloid precursor protein by β-secretase (BACE1) is a key step in generating the N-terminal of β-amyloid (Aβ), which further forms into amyloid plaques that are considered as the hallmark of Alzheimer's disease. Inhibitors of BACE1 can reduce the levels of Aβ and thus have a therapeutic potential for treating the disease. We report here the identification of a series of small molecules bearing an indole acylguanidine core structure as potent BACE1 inhibitors. The initial weak fragment was discovered by virtual screening, and followed with a hit-to-lead optimization. With the aid of co-crystal structures of two discovered inhibitors (compounds 19 and 25) with BACE1, we explored the SAR around the indole and aryl groups, and obtained several BACE1 inhibitors about 1,000-fold more potent than the initial fragment hit. Accompanying the lead optimization, a previously under-explored sub-site opposite the flap loop was redefined as a potential binding site for later BACE1 inhibitor design.

Number:  113
UID:  23640428
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  In this work we propose a protocol for estimating the effect of pH on the docking performance to BACE-1, which affords the charge state of the inhibitor as well as the protonation state of all ionisable residues in the protein at a given pH value. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of a protocol predicting the BACE-1 ligand docking poses not only at the neutral pH at which most crystallographic structures were obtained, but also at the optimal pH of the enzyme (in the acidic range), at which most of the BACE-1 binding affinity assays are performed. We have applied this protocol to a set of 23 fragment-like BACE-1 ligands that span four orders of magnitude in their binding affinities. The pK a values of the BACE-1 acidic residues deviate substantially from the estimates for model compounds in solution and display a ligand dependent variability, especially in the case of the catalytic Asp dyad residues. This outcome should have a strong bearing on the design of protocols for docking based BACE-1 screening campaigns. Finally, we were able to find an explanation for the poor docking success rate of some fragments based on the availability of anchoring points, a rationale that could help to improve hit rates in BACE-1 screening campaigns.

Number:  114
UID:  23637177
Founded words:  ['activation']
Abstract:  Proteolytic shedding of cell surface proteins generates paracrine signals involved in numerous signaling pathways. Neuregulin 1 (NRG1) type III is involved in myelination of the peripheral nervous system, for which it requires proteolytic activation by proteases of the ADAM family and BACE1. These proteases are major therapeutic targets for the prevention of Alzheimer's disease because they are also involved in the proteolytic generation of the neurotoxic amyloid β-peptide. Identification and functional investigation of their physiological substrates is therefore of greatest importance in preventing unwanted side effects. Here we investigated proteolytic processing of NRG1 type III and demonstrate that the ectodomain can be cleaved by three different sheddases, namely ADAM10, ADAM17, and BACE1. Surprisingly, we not only found cleavage by ADAM10, ADAM17, and BACE1 C-terminal to the epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like domain, which is believed to play a pivotal role in signaling, but also additional cleavage sites for ADAM17 and BACE1 N-terminal to that domain. Proteolytic processing at N- and C-terminal sites of the EGF-like domain results in the secretion of this domain from NRG1 type III. The soluble EGF-like domain is functionally active and stimulates ErbB3 signaling in tissue culture assays. Moreover, the soluble EGF-like domain is capable of rescuing hypomyelination in a zebrafish mutant lacking BACE1. Our data suggest that NRG1 type III-dependent myelination is not only controlled by membrane-retained NRG1 type III, but also in a paracrine manner via proteolytic liberation of the EGF-like domain.

Number:  115
UID:  23636093
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'mediates', 'function', 'function', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Bispecific antibodies using the transferrin receptor (TfR) have shown promise for boosting antibody uptake in brain. Nevertheless, there are limited data on the therapeutic properties including safety liabilities that will enable successful development of TfR-based therapeutics. We evaluate TfR/BACE1 bispecific antibody variants in mouse and show that reducing TfR binding affinity improves not only brain uptake but also peripheral exposure and the safety profile of these antibodies. We identify and seek to address liabilities of targeting TfR with antibodies, namely, acute clinical signs and decreased circulating reticulocytes observed after dosing. By eliminating Fc effector function, we ameliorated the acute clinical signs and partially rescued a reduction in reticulocytes. Furthermore, we show that complement mediates a residual decrease in reticulocytes observed after Fc effector function is eliminated. These data raise important safety concerns and potential mitigation strategies for the development of TfR-based therapies that are designed to cross the blood-brain barrier.

Number:  116
UID:  23627297
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interactions']
Abstract:  β-secretase (BACE-1) plays a pivotal role in the β-Amyloid plaques formation, which is responsible for progressive cognitive and memory loss commonly found in Alzheimer disease patients. As a consequence, it has been considered as a good target for drug development efforts. Early work focused on the synthesis of peptidomimetics, but poor pharmacokinetics profile prevented advancing lead compounds to clinical trials. As an alternative, aminoimidazoles, aminohydantoins and aminopyridines derivatives that inhibit BACE-1 were designed. Herein we report statistically sound descriptor- based (r(2) = 0.87, q(2) = 0.85, 6 PCs) and fragment-based (r(2) = 0.91, q(2) = 0.84, 6 PCs) QSAR models, that show high predictive ability (r(2)pred = 0.84, averaged r(2)m=0.78) and underscore polar interactions that are important for BACE-1 inhibition.

Number:  117
UID:  23596049
Founded words:  ['associated']
Abstract:  Beta-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme (BACE1) is highly expressed in pancreatic β-cells. The BACE1 gene is located in a region associated with a high diabetes risk in PIMA Indians.

Number:  118
UID:  23596049
Founded words:  ['association']
Abstract:  INS-1E cells were used to study the impact of siRNA-mediated BACE1 knockdown and glucose metabolism was characterized in Bace1(-/-) mice. BACE1 gene was sequenced in DNA samples from 48 subjects and 13 representative single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were then genotyped for association studies in 1,527 Caucasians.

Number:  119
UID:  23596049
Founded words:  ['associated']
Abstract:  Reduction of Bace1 expression results in a significant decrease in insulin mRNA expression in INS-1E cells. Bace1(-/-) mice display significantly lower body weight, lower plasma insulin concentrations, but normal glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity. In a case-control study including 538 healthy controls and 989 patients with type 2 diabetes (T2D), one SNP (rs535860) was significantly associated with T2D (P < 3.5 × 10(-5) , adjusted for age, sex, and BMI).

Number:  120
UID:  23596049
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'regulation', 'regulation']
Abstract:  Reduced Bace1 expression causes impaired insulin expression in pancreatic β-cells of Bace1(-/-) mice, suggesting that BACE1 plays a role in the regulation of insulin biogenesis. The functionally relevant rs535860 SNP may decrease BACE1 expression by creating a new miR-661 binding site and could therefore contribute to T2D development.

Number:  121
UID:  23564327
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  β-Secretase (BACE) is a very promising target in the search for a treatment for Alzheimer's disease using a protein-ligand inhibition approach. Given the many published X-ray structures of BACE protein, structure-based drug design has been used extensively to support new inhibitor discovery programs. Due to the high flexibility and large catalytic site of this protein, sampling of the huge conformational space of the binding site is the big challenge to overcome and is the main limitation of the most widely used docking programs. Incorrect treatment of these pitfalls can introduce bias into ligand docking and could affect the results. This is especially the case with the WY-25105 compound reported by the Wyeth Corporation as a BACE ligand that did not fit into any of the known crystal structures. In the present retrospective study, a set of available X-ray enzyme structures was selected and molecular dynamics simulations were conducted to generate more diverse representative BACE protein conformations. These conformations were then used for a docking study of the WY-25105 compound. The results confirmed the need to use an ensemble of structures in protein-ligand docking for identification of new binding modes in structure-based drug design of BACE inhibitors.

Number:  122
UID:  23537249
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  A hallmark of Alzheimer's disease is the brain deposition of amyloid beta (Aβ), a peptide of 36-43 amino acids that is likely a primary driver of neurodegeneration. Aβ is produced by the sequential cleavage of APP by BACE1 and γ-secretase; therefore, inhibition of BACE1 represents an attractive therapeutic target to slow or prevent Alzheimer's disease. Herein we describe BACE1 inhibitors with limited molecular flexibility and molecular weight that decrease CSF Aβ in vivo, despite efflux. Starting with spirocycle 1a, we explore structure-activity relationships of core changes, P3 moieties, and Asp binding functional groups in order to optimize BACE1 affinity, cathepsin D selectivity, and blood-brain barrier (BBB) penetration. Using wild type guinea pig and rat, we demonstrate a PK/PD relationship between free drug concentrations in the brain and CSF Aβ lowering. Optimization of brain exposure led to the discovery of (R)-50 which reduced CSF Aβ in rodents and in monkey.

Number:  123
UID:  23504710
Founded words:  ['activation', 'mediated', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulating', 'regulating', 'regulate', 'regulated', 'regulating', 'regulating']
Abstract:  BACE1 and presenilin (PS)/γ-secretase play a major role in Alzheimer's disease pathogenesis by regulating amyloid-β peptide generation. We recently showed that these secretases also regulate the processing of voltage-gated sodium channel auxiliary β-subunits and thereby modulate membrane excitability. Here, we report that KCNE1 and KCNE2, auxiliary subunits of voltage-gated potassium channels, undergo sequential cleavage mediated by either α-secretase and PS/γ-secretase or BACE1 and PS/γ-secretase in cells. Elevated α-secretase or BACE1 activities increased C-terminal fragment (CTF) levels of KCNE1 and 2 in human embryonic kidney (HEK293T) and rat neuroblastoma (B104) cells. KCNE-CTFs were then further processed by PS/γ-secretase to KCNE intracellular domains. These KCNE cleavages were specifically blocked by chemical inhibitors of the secretases in the same cell models. We also verified our results in mouse cardiomyocytes and cultured primary neurons. Endogenous KCNE1- and KCNE2-CTF levels increased by 2- to 4-fold on PS/γ-secretase inhibition or BACE1 overexpression in these cells. Furthermore, the elevated BACE1 activity increased KCNE1 processing and shifted KCNE1/KCNQ1 channel activation curve to more positive potentials in HEK cells. KCNE1/KCNQ1 channel is a cardiac potassium channel complex, and the positive shift would lead to a decrease in membrane repolarization during cardiac action potential. Together, these results clearly showed that KCNE1 and KCNE2 cleavages are regulated by BACE1 and PS/γ-secretase activities under physiological conditions. Our results also suggest a functional role of KCNE cleavage in regulating voltage-gated potassium channels.

Number:  124
UID:  23457027
Founded words:  ['function', 'function', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  The aspartyl protease BACE1 cleaves neuregulin 1 and is involved in myelination and is a candidate drug target for Alzheimer's disease, where it acts as the β-secretase cleaving the amyloid precursor protein. However, little is known about other substrates in vivo. Here, we provide a proteomic workflow for BACE1 substrate identification from whole brains, combining filter-aided sample preparation, strong-anion exchange fractionation, and label-free quantification. We used bace1-deficient zebrafish and quantified differences in protein levels between wild-type and bace1 -/- zebrafish brains. Over 4500 proteins were identified with at least two unique peptides and quantified in both wild-type and bace1 -/- zebrafish brains. The majority of zebrafish membrane proteins did not show altered protein levels, indicating that Bace1 has a restricted substrate specificity. Twenty-four membrane proteins accumulated in the bace1 -/- brains and thus represent candidate Bace1 substrates. They include several known BACE1 substrates, such as the zebrafish homologs of amyloid precursor protein and the cell adhesion protein L1, which validate the proteomic workflow. Additionally, several candidate substrates with a function in neurite outgrowth and axon guidance, such as plexin A3 and glypican-1 were identified, pointing to a function of Bace1 in neurodevelopment. Taken together, our study provides the first proteomic analysis of knock-out zebrafish tissue and demonstrates that combining gene knock-out models in zebrafish with quantitative proteomics is a powerful approach to address biomedical questions.

Number:  125
UID:  23452816
Founded words:  ['regulation', 'regulation', 'functions', 'functions', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  β-Secretase (BACE1, β-site APP cleaving enzyme 1) is an aspartic proteinase that has multiple functions in various physiological processes, such as cell differentiation, immunoregulation, and cell death. There is increasing evidence that changes in BACE1 activity are involved in many diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), schizophrenia, epileptic behavior, and others. However, a deeper understanding of the molecular biology of BACE1 is necessary for further exploration of cell development, immunological regulation, and disease pathogenesis. Here, we review the molecular and cellular biology of BACE1, including its enzymatic properties, structure, biosynthesis, and physiological functions to provide a new perspective and rational assessment of drugability. Lastly, we discuss proposed strategies to control BACE1 activity for possible therapeutic application.

Number:  126
UID:  23447608
Founded words:  ['regulating', 'regulating']
Abstract:  Previous studies have demonstrated that chronic brain hypoperfusion (CBH) causes Aβ aggregation by upregulating expression of amyloid precursor protein (APP) and β-site APP cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) protein, which is accompanied by cognitive impairment, but the mechanisms are not fully understood. In this study, we evaluated the effect of microRNA on memory impairment in rats induced by CBH. We show here that CBH generated by bilateral common carotid artery occlusion (2VO) significantly decreased the learning and memory ability in rats, as assessed by Morris water maze, and upregulated expression of APP and BACE1 proteins in the hippocampus and cortex of rats, as evaluated by Western blot and immunofluorescence. In reciprocal, qRT-PCR analysis showed that microRNA-195 (miR-195) was downregulated in both the hippocampus and cortex of rats following CBH, and in the plasma of dementia patients. APP and BACE1 proteins were downregulated by miR-195 overexpression, upregulated by miR-195 inhibition, and unchanged by binding-site mutation or miR-masks, indicating that APP and BACE1 are two potential targets for miR-195. Knockdown of endogenous miR-195 by lentiviral vector-mediated overexpression of its antisense molecule (lenti-pre-AMO-miR-195) elicited dementia in rats, whereas overexpression of miR-195 using lenti-pre-miR-195 reduced dementia vulnerability triggered by 2VO. Additionally, chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis showed that NFκB was bound to the promoter region of miR-195 and inhibited its expression. We conclude that miR-195 may play a key role in determining dementia susceptibility in 2VO rats by regulating APP and BACE1 expression at the post-transcriptional level, and exogenous complement of miR-195 may be a potentially valuable anti-dementia approach.

Number:  127
UID:  23443094
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'associated', 'interactions']
Abstract:  Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) -based techniques have recently been applied to study the interactions between β-site APP-cleaving enzyme-GFP (BACE1-GFP) and amyloid precursor protein-mRFP (APP-mRFP) in U373 glioblastoma cells. In this context, the role of APP-BACE1 proximity in Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathogenesis has been discussed. FRET was found to depend on intracellular cholesterol levels and associated alterations in membrane stiffness. Here, NPC1 null cells (CHO-NPC1-/-), exhibiting increased cholesterol levels and disturbed cholesterol transport similar to that observed in Niemann-Pick type C disease (NPC), were used to analyze the influence of altered cholesterol levels on APP-BACE1 proximity. Fluorescence lifetime measurements of whole CHO-wild type (WT) and CHO-NPC1-/- cells (EPI-illumination microscopy), as well as their plasma membranes (total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy, TIRFM), were performed. Additionally, generalized polarization (GP) measurements of CHO-WT and CHO-NPC1-/- cells incubated with the fluorescence marker laurdan were performed to determine membrane stiffness of plasma- and intracellular-membranes. CHO-NPC1-/- cells showed higher membrane stiffness at intracellular- but not plasma-membranes, equivalent to cholesterol accumulation in late endosomes/lysosomes. Along with higher membrane stiffness, the FRET efficiency between BACE1-GFP and APP-mRFP was reduced at intracellular membranes, but not within the plasma membrane of CHO-NPC1-/-. Our data show that FRET combined with TIRF is a powerful technique to determine protein proximity and membrane fluidity in cellular models of neurodegenerative diseases.

Number:  128
UID:  23410038
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activated', 'associated', 'mediated', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  The metalloproteases meprin α and meprin β exhibit structural and functional features that are unique among all extracellular proteases. Although meprins were discovered more than 30 years ago, their precise substrates and physiological roles have been elusive. Both enzymes were originally found to be highly expressed in kidney and intestine, which focused research on these particular tissues and associated pathologies. Only recently it has become evident that meprins exhibit a much broader expression pattern, implicating functions in angiogenesis, cancer, inflammation, fibrosis and neurodegenerative diseases. Different animal models, as well as proteomics approaches for the identification of protease substrates, have helped to reveal more precise molecular signalling events mediated by meprin activity, such as activation and release of pro-inflammatory cytokines. APP (amyloid precursor protein) is cleaved by meprin β in vivo, reminiscent of the β-secretase BACE1 (β-site APP-cleaving enzyme 1). The subsequent release of Aβ (amyloid β) peptides is thought to be the major cause of the neurodegenerative Alzheimer's disease. On the other hand, ADAM10 (a disintegrin and metalloprotease domain 10), which is the constitutive α-secretase, was shown to be activated by meprin β, which is itself shed from the cell surface by ADAM10. In skin, both meprins are overexpressed in fibrotic tumours, characterized by massive accumulation of fibrillar collagens. Indeed, procollagen III is processed to its mature form by meprin α and meprin β, an essential step in collagen fibril assembly. The recently solved crystal structure of meprin β and the unique cleavage specificity of these proteases identified by proteomics will help to generate specific inhibitors that could be used as therapeutics to target meprins under certain pathological conditions.

Number:  129
UID:  23407961
Founded words:  ['associative', 'associated']
Abstract:  Neuritic dystrophy is one of the important pathological features associated with amyloid plaques in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and age-dependent neuronal dysfunctions. We reported previously that reticulon-3 (RTN3) immunoreactive dystrophic neurites (RIDNs) are abundantly present in the hippocampus of AD patients, in AD mouse models, and in aged wild-type mice. Transgenic mice overexpressing the human RTN3 transgene spontaneously develop RIDNs in their hippocampi, and the formation of RIDNs correlates with the appearance of RTN3 aggregation. To further elucidate whether the formation of RIDNs is reversible, we generated transgenic mice expressing wild-type human RTN3 under the control of a tetracycline-responsive promoter. Treatment with doxycycline for 2 months effectively turned off expression of the human RTN3 transgene, confirming the inducible nature of the system. However, the formation of hippocampal RIDNs was dependent on whether the transgene was turned off before or after the formation of RTN3 aggregates. When transgenic human RTN3 expression was turned off at young age, formation of RIDNs was essentially eliminated compared with the vehicle-treated transgenic mice. More importantly, a fear conditioning study demonstrated that contextual associative learning and memory in inducible transgenic mice was improved if the density of RIDNs was lowered. Additional mechanistic study suggested that a reduction in BDNF levels in transgenic mice might contribute to the reduced learning and memory in transgenic mice overexpressing RTN3. Hence, we conclude that age-dependent RIDNs cannot be effectively cleared once they have formed, and we postulate that successful prevention of RIDN formation should be initiated before RTN3 aggregation.

Number:  130
UID:  23386614
Founded words:  ['activation', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'bind', 'bind', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'bind', 'bind']
Abstract:  Soluble oligomers of the amyloid-β (Aβ) peptide cause neurotoxicity, synaptic dysfunction, and memory impairments that underlie Alzheimer disease (AD). The cellular prion protein (PrP(C)) was recently identified as a high affinity neuronal receptor for Aβ oligomers. We report that fibrillar Aβ oligomers recognized by the OC antibody, which have been shown to correlate with the onset and severity of AD, bind preferentially to cells and neurons expressing PrP(C). The binding of Aβ oligomers to cell surface PrP(C), as well as their downstream activation of Fyn kinase, was dependent on the integrity of cholesterol-rich lipid rafts. In SH-SY5Y cells, fluorescence microscopy and co-localization with subcellular markers revealed that the Aβ oligomers co-internalized with PrP(C), accumulated in endosomes, and subsequently trafficked to lysosomes. The cell surface binding, internalization, and downstream toxicity of Aβ oligomers was dependent on the transmembrane low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein-1 (LRP1). The binding of Aβ oligomers to cell surface PrP(C) impaired its ability to inhibit the activity of the β-secretase BACE1, which cleaves the amyloid precursor protein to produce Aβ. The green tea polyphenol (-)-epigallocatechin gallate and the red wine extract resveratrol both remodeled the fibrillar conformation of Aβ oligomers. The resulting nonfibrillar oligomers displayed significantly reduced binding to PrP(C)-expressing cells and were no longer cytotoxic. These data indicate that soluble, fibrillar Aβ oligomers bind to PrP(C) in a conformation-dependent manner and require the integrity of lipid rafts and the transmembrane LRP1 for their cytotoxicity, thus revealing potential targets to alleviate the neurotoxic properties of Aβ oligomers in AD.

Number:  131
UID:  23274884
Founded words:  ['regulating', 'regulating']
Abstract:  Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common age-related neurodegenerative disease, affecting an estimated 5.3million people in the United States. While many factors likely contribute to AD progression, it is widely accepted that AD is driven by the accumulation of β-amyloid (Aβ), a small, fibrillogenic peptide generated by the sequential proteolysis of the amyloid precursor protein by the β- and γ-secretases. Though the underlying causes of Aβ accumulation in sporadic AD are myriad, it is clear that lifestyle and overall health play a significant role. The adipocyte-derived hormone leptin has varied systemic affects, including neuropeptide release and neuroprotection. A recent study by Lieb et al. (2009) showed that individuals with low plasma leptin levels are at greater risk of developing AD, through unknown mechanisms. In this report, we show that plasma leptin is a strong negative predictor of Aβ levels in the mouse brain, supporting a protective role for the hormone in AD onset. We also show that the inhibition of Aβ accumulation is due to the downregulation of transcription of the γ-secretase components. On the other hand, β-secretase expression is either unchanged (BACE1) or increased (BACE2). Finally, we show that only presenilin 1 (PS1) is negatively correlated with plasma leptin at the protein level (p<0.0001). These data are intriguing and may highlight a role for leptin in regulating the onset of amyloid pathology and AD.

Number:  132
UID:  23178169
Founded words:  ['regulation', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulatory', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulation']
Abstract:  Eukaryotic cells transcribe a vast number of noncoding RNA species. Among them, long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been widely implicated in the regulation of gene transcription. However, examples of posttranscriptional gene regulation by lncRNAs are emerging. Through extended base-pairing, lncRNAs can stabilize or promote the translation of target mRNAs, while partial base-pairing facilitates mRNA decay or inhibits target mRNA translation. In the absence of complementarity, lncRNAs can suppress precursor mRNA splicing and translation by acting as decoys of RNA-binding proteins or microRNAs and can compete for microRNA-mediated inhibition leading to increased expression of the mRNA. Through these regulatory mechanisms, lncRNAs can elicit differentiation, proliferation, and cytoprotective programs, underscoring the rising recognition of lncRNA roles in human disease. In this review, we summarize the mechanisms of posttranscriptional gene regulation by lncRNAs identified until now.

Number:  133
UID:  23126626
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  By use of iterative design aided by predictive models for target affinity, brain permeability, and hERG activity, novel and diverse compounds based on cyclic amidine and guanidine cores were synthesized with the goal of finding BACE-1 inhibitors as a treatment for Alzheimer's disease. Since synthesis feasibility had low priority in the design of the cores, an extensive synthesis effort was needed to make the relevant compounds. Syntheses of these compounds are reported, together with physicochemical properties and structure-activity relationships based on in vitro data. Four crystal structures of diverse amidines binding in the active site are deposited and discussed. Inhibitors of BACE-1 with 3 μM to 32 nM potencies in cells are shown, together with data on in vivo brain exposure levels for four compounds. The results presented show the importance of the core structure for the profile of the final compounds.

Number:  134
UID:  23109336
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'regulated']
Abstract:  β-Site amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzyme (BACE1) is a membrane-tethered member of the aspartyl proteases that has been identified as β-secretase. BACE1 is targeted through the secretory pathway to the plasma membrane and then is internalized to endosomes. Sorting of membrane proteins to the endosomes and lysosomes is regulated by the interaction of signals present in their carboxyl-terminal fragment with specific trafficking molecules. The BACE1 carboxyl-terminal fragment contains a di-leucine sorting signal ((495)DDISLL(500)) and a ubiquitination site at Lys-501. Here, we report that lack of ubiquitination at Lys-501 (BACE1K501R) does not affect the rate of endocytosis but produces BACE1 stabilization and accumulation of BACE1 in early and late endosomes/lysosomes as well as at the cell membrane. In contrast, the disruption of the di-leucine motif (BACE1LLAA) greatly impairs BACE1 endocytosis and produces a delayed retrograde transport of BACE1 to the trans-Golgi network (TGN) and a delayed delivery of BACE1 to the lysosomes, thus decreasing its degradation. Moreover, the combination of the lack of ubiquitination at Lys-501 and the disruption of the di-leucine motif (BACE1LLAA/KR) produces additive effects on BACE1 stabilization and defective internalization. Finally, BACE1LLAA/KR accumulates in the TGN, while its levels are decreased in EEA1-positive compartments indicating that both ubiquitination at Lys-501 and the di-leucine motif are necessary for the trafficking of BACE1 from the TGN to early endosomes. Our studies have elucidated a differential role for the di-leucine motif and ubiquitination at Lys-501 in BACE1 endocytosis, trafficking, and degradation and suggest the involvement of multiple adaptor molecules.

Number:  135
UID:  23030502
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interaction', 'interactions', 'interaction', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  This report describes the discovery and optimization of a BACE-1 inhibitor series containing an unusual acyl guanidine chemotype that was originally synthesized as part of a 6041-membered solid-phase library. The synthesis of multiple follow-up solid- and solution-phase libraries facilitated the optimization of the original micromolar hit into a single-digit nanomolar BACE-1 inhibitor in both radioligand binding and cell-based functional assay formats. The X-ray structure of representative inhibitors bound to BACE-1 revealed a number of key ligand:protein interactions, including a hydrogen bond between the side chain amide of flap residue Gln73 and the acyl guanidine carbonyl group, and a cation-π interaction between Arg235 and the isothiazole 4-methoxyphenyl substituent. Following subcutaneous administration in rats, an acyl guanidine inhibitor with single-digit nanomolar activity in cells afforded good plasma exposures and a dose-dependent reduction in plasma Aβ levels, but poor brain exposure was observed (likely due to Pgp-mediated efflux), and significant reductions in brain Aβ levels were not obtained.

Number:  136
UID:  23024787
Founded words:  ['associated', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  Several lines of investigation support the notion that endocytosis is crucial for Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathogenesis. Substantial evidence have already been reported regarding the mechanisms underlying amyloid precursor protein (APP) traffic, but the regulation of beta-site APP-Cleaving Enzyme 1 (BACE-1) distribution among endosomes, TGN and plasma membrane remains unclear. Dynamin, an important adaptor protein that controls sorting of many molecules, has recently been associated with AD but its functions remain controversial. Here we studied possible roles for dynamin 1 (dyn1) in Aβ biogenesis.

Number:  137
UID:  23024787
Founded words:  ['mediated', 'regulation', 'regulation']
Abstract:  We found that genetic perturbation of dyn1 reduces both secreted and intracellular Aβ levels in cell culture. There is a dramatic reduction in BACE-1 cleavage products of APP (sAPPβ and βCTF). Moreover, dyn1 knockdown (KD) leads to BACE-1 redistribution from the Golgi-TGN/endosome to the cell surface. There is an increase in the amount of surface holoAPP upon dyn1 KD, with resultant elevation of α-secretase cleavage products sAPPα and αCTF. But no changes are seen in the amount of nicastrin (NCT) or PS1 N-terminal fragment (NTF) at cell surface with dyn1 KD. Furthermore, treatment with a selective dynamin inhibitor Dynasore leads to similar reduction in βCTF and Aβ levels, comparable to changes with BACE inhibitor treatment. But combined inhibition of BACE-1 and dyn1 does not lead to further reduction in Aβ, suggesting that the Aβ-lowering effects of dynamin inhibition are mainly mediated through regulation of BACE-1 internalization. Aβ levels in dyn1(-/-) primary neurons, as well as in 3-month old dyn1 haploinsufficient animals with AD transgenic background are consistently reduced when compared to their wildtype counterparts.

Number:  138
UID:  23024787
Founded words:  ['regulation', 'regulation']
Abstract:  In summary, these data suggest a previously unknown mechanism by which dyn1 affects amyloid generation through regulation of BACE-1 subcellular localization and therefore its enzymatic activities.

Number:  139
UID:  22998419
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Improvement of a drug's binding activity using the conformational restriction approach with sp³ hybridized carbon is becoming a key strategy in drug discovery. We applied this approach to BACE1 inhibitors and designed four stereoisomeric cyclopropane compounds in which the ethylene linker of a known amidine-type inhibitor 2 was replaced with chiral cyclopropane rings. The synthesis and biologic evaluation of these compounds revealed that the cis-(1S,2R) isomer 6 exhibited the most potent BACE1 inhibitory activity among them. X-ray structure analysis of the complex of 6 and BACE1 revealed that its unique binding mode is due to the apparent CH-π interaction between the rigid cyclopropane ring and the Tyr71 side chain. A derivatization study using 6 as a lead molecule led to the development of highly potent inhibitors in which the structure-activity relationship as well as the binding mode of the compounds clearly differ from those of known amidine-type inhibitors.

Number:  140
UID:  22989333
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  On the basis of our observation that the biaryl substituent of iminopyrimidinone 7 must be in a pseudoaxial conformation to occupy the contiguous S1-S3 subsites of BACE1, we have designed a novel fused bicyclic iminopyrimidinone scaffold intended to favor this bioactive conformation. Strategic incorporation of a nitrogen atom in the new constrained ring allowed us to develop SAR around the S2' binding pocket and ultimately resulted in analogues with low nanomolar potency for BACE1. In particular, optimization of the prime side substituent led to major improvements in potency by displacement of two conserved water molecules from a region near S2'. Further optimization of the pharmacokinetic properties of this fused pyrrolidine series, in conjunction with facile access to a rat pharmacodynamic model, led to identification of compound 43, which is an orally active, brain penetrant inhibitor that reduces Aβ(40) in the plasma, CSF, and cortex of rats in a dose-dependent manner.

Number:  141
UID:  22954333
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'binding', 'bind', 'binding', 'bind']
Abstract:  We have developed a novel fluorogenic nanoprobe prepared from the assembly of CdSe/ZnS quantum dot (QD) and gold (Au) nanoparticles in which QD was conjugated with a specifically designed β-secretase (BACE1) substrate peptide, which was allowed to bind to the Ni-nitrilotriacetate (Ni-NTA) modified Au nanoparticles. This coordination-mediated binding of the QD with Au nanoparticles via Ni-NTA-histidine (His) interaction resulted in highly efficient quenching of QD fluorescence through a distance-dependent fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) phenomenon. The prequenched QD-Au assembly recovered the fluorescence in the presence of the BACE1 enzyme after incubation in vitro. The high quenching efficiency of AuNP and robust QD fluorescence signal recovery upon BACE1 enzymatic digestion enabled us to visualize BACE1 activity in living cells, which further allowed us to generate the half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC(50)) values for BACE1 inhibitors in the cell-based assay utilizing a high throughput system (HTS). These results suggest the potential application of QD-AuNP assembly toward the HTS drug screening system as a robust and efficient probe to identify active molecules in BACE1-related diseases such as Alzheimer's disease.

Number:  142
UID:  22952813
Founded words:  ['interacts', 'association', 'associated', 'interacts', 'regulating', 'regulating']
Abstract:  The β site APP cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) is the rate-limiting β-secretase enzyme in the amyloidogenic processing of APP and Aβ formation, and therefore it has a prominent role in Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathology. Recent evidence suggests that the prion protein (PrP) interacts directly with BACE1 regulating its β-secretase activity. Moreover, PrP has been proposed as the cellular receptor involved in the impairment of synaptic plasticity and toxicity caused by Aβ oligomers. Provided that common pathophysiologic mechanisms are shared by Alzheimer's and Creutzfeldt-Jakob (CJD) diseases, we investigated for the first time to the best of our knowledge a possible association of a common synonymous BACE1 polymorphism (rs638405) with sporadic CJD (sCJD). Our results indicate that BACE1 C-allele is associated with an increased risk for developing sCJD, mainly in PRNP M129M homozygous subjects with early onset. These results extend the very short list of genes (other than PRNP) involved in the development of human prion diseases; and support the notion that similar to AD, in sCJD several loci may contribute with modest overall effects to disease risk. These findings underscore the interplay in both pathologies of APP, Aβ oligomers, ApoE, PrP and BACE1, and suggest that aging and perhaps vascular risk factors may modulate disease pathologies in part through these key players.

Number:  143
UID:  22940630
Founded words:  ['activation']
Abstract:  Proteolytic cleavage of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) by the two proteases α- and β-secretases controls the generation of the amyloid β peptide (Aβ), a key player in Alzheimer's disease pathogenesis. The α-secretase ADAM10 and the β-secretase BACE1 have opposite effects on Aβ generation and are assumed to compete for APP as a substrate, such that their cleavages are inversely coupled. This concept was mainly demonstrated in studies using activation or overexpression of α- and β-secretases. Here, we report that this inverse coupling is not seen to the same extent upon inhibition of the endogenous proteases. Genetic and pharmacological inhibition of ADAM10 and BACE1 revealed that the endogenous, constitutive α-secretase cleavage of APP is largely uncoupled from β-secretase cleavage and Aβ generation in neuroglioma H4 cells and in neuronally differentiated SH-SY5Y cells. In contrast, inverse coupling was observed in primary cortical neurons. However, this coupling was not bidirectional. Inhibition of BACE1 increased ADAM10 cleavage of APP, but a reduction of ADAM10 activity did not increase the BACE1 cleavage of APP in the neurons. Our analysis shows that the inverse coupling of the endogenous α- and β-secretase cleavages depends on the cellular model and suggests that a reduction of ADAM10 activity is unlikely to increase the AD risk through increased β-secretase cleavage.

Number:  144
UID:  22911925
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Sequential proteolytic cleavage of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) by β-site APP-cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) and the γ-secretase complex produces the amyloid-β peptide (Aβ), which is believed to play a critical role in the pathology of Alzheimer's disease (AD). The aspartyl protease BACE1 catalyzes the rate-limiting step in the production of Aβ, and as such it is considered to be an important target for drug development in AD. The development of a BACE1 inhibitor therapeutic has proven to be difficult. The active site of BACE1 is relatively large. Consequently, to achieve sufficient potency, many BACE1 inhibitors have required unfavorable physicochemical properties such as high molecular weight and polar surface area that are detrimental to efficient passage across the blood-brain barrier. Using a rational drug design approach we have designed and developed a new series of hydroxyethylamine-based inhibitors of BACE1 capable of lowering Aβ levels in the brains of rats after oral administration. Herein we describe the in vitro and in vivo characterization of two of these molecules and the overall relationship of compound properties [e.g., in vitro permeability, P-glycoprotein (P-gp) efflux, metabolic stability, and pharmacological potency] to the in vivo pharmacodynamic effect with more than 100 compounds across the chemical series. We demonstrate that high in vitro potency for BACE1 was not sufficient to provide central efficacy. A combination of potency, high permeability, low P-gp-mediated efflux, and low clearance was required for compounds to produce robust central Aβ reduction after oral dosing.

Number:  145
UID:  22855816
Founded words:  ['binding', 'bind', 'bind', 'binding', 'bind', 'bind']
Abstract:  The accumulation of the β-amyloid peptide (Aβ) in Alzheimer's disease (AD) is thought to play a causative role in triggering synaptic dysfunction in neurons, leading to their eventual demise through apoptosis. Aβ is produced and secreted upon sequential cleavage of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) by β-secretases and γ-secretases. However, while Aβ levels have been shown to be increased in the brains of AD patients, little is known about how the cleavage of APP and the subsequent generation of Aβ is influenced, or whether the cleavage process changes over time. It has been proposed that Aβ can bind APP and promote amyloidogenic processing of APP, further enhancing Aβ production. Proof of this idea has remained elusive because a clear mechanism has not been identified, and the promiscuous nature of Aβ binding complicates the task of demonstrating the idea. To work around these problems, we used an antibody-mediated approach to bind and cross-link cell-surface APP in cultured rat primary hippocampal neurons. Here we show that cross-linking of APP is sufficient to raise the levels of Aβ in viable neurons with a concomitant increase in the levels of the β-secretase BACE1. This appears to occur as a result of a sorting defect that stems from the caspase-3-mediated inactivation of a key sorting adaptor protein, namely GGA3, which prevents the lysosomal degradation of BACE1. Together, our data suggest the occurrence of a positive pathogenic feedback loop involving Aβ and APP in affected neurons possibly allowing Aβ to spread to nearby healthy neurons.

Number:  146
UID:  22846573
Founded words:  ['activated', 'interaction', 'associated', 'associated', 'interaction', 'regulated']
Abstract:  The β-site APP cleaving enzyme (BACE1) is required for the production of β-amyloid peptides, which give rise to β-amyloid (Aβ) deposits in the brains of Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients. In brains, BACE1 is primarily expressed by neurons, however BACE1 expression has also been observed in reactive astrocytes in close proximity to β-amyloid plaques in the brains of aged Tg2576 AD model mice. To date, the direct effects of Aβ on BACE1 gene expression in astrocytes is unknown. We found that Aβ42 or Aβ25-35 treatment induced BACE1 expression in primary astrocytes as well as human astrocytoma cell line. Aβ neurotoxicity has been associated with the disruption of intracellular calcium homeostasis both in neurons and in glial cells. Here, we demonstrated that NFAT4, a transcription factor tightly regulated by the calcium/calmodulin-dependent phosphatase, calcineurin, was activated in astrocytes applied with calcium ionophore or Aβ. Aβ-activated NFAT4 proteins were associated with astrocytic BACE1 gene expression via direct interaction with the BACE1 promoter region.

Number:  147
UID:  22842730
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  Fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) was used to characterize the inhibitory effect of L655,240 on BACE1. Surface plasmon resonance (SPR) technology-based assay was performed to study the binding affinity of L655,240 for BACE1. The selectivity of L655,240 toward BACE1 over other aspartic proteases was determined with enzymatic assay. The effects of L655,240 on Aβ40, Aβ42, and sAPPβ production were studied in HEK293 cells stably expressing APP695 Swedish mutant(K595N/M596L) (HEK293-APPswe cells). The activities of BACE1, γ-secretase and α-secretase were assayed, and both the mRNA and protein levels of APP and BACE1 were evaluated using real-time PCR (RT-PCR) and Western blot analysis.

Number:  148
UID:  22796214
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'interact', 'associated', 'associated', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interact', 'binding', 'binds', 'binding']
Abstract:  The prion protein (PrP) and the beta-site amyloid precursor protein (APP) cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE-1) are both copper binding proteins, but are associated with two separate neurodegenerative diseases. The role of BACE-1 in the formation of beta-amyloid has made it a major target in attempts to reduce the formation of beta-amyloid in Alzheimer's diseases. However, the suggestion that PrP, normally associated with prion diseases, binds to BACE-1 and reduces its activity has led to the suggestion that the study of this interaction could be of considerable importance to Alzheimer's disease. We therefore undertook to investigate the possible interaction of these two proteins physically and at the level of transcription, translation and APP cleavage. Our findings suggest that mature PrP and BACE-1 do not physically interact, but that altered PrP expression results in altered BACE-1 protein expression and promoter activity. Additionally, overexpression of PrP results in increased cleavage of APP in contrast to previous datas suggesting a reduction. Our findings suggest that any relation between PrP and BACE-1 is indirect. Altered expression of PrP causes changes in the expression of many other proteins which may be as a result of altered copper metabolism.

Number:  149
UID:  22708832
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activation', 'activated']
Abstract:  The pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is only partially understood. β-amyloid (Aβ) is physiologically generated by sequential cleavage of its precursor protein by the β- and the γ-secretase and it is normally disposed of. In Alzheimer's disease, Aβ is excessively produced or less dismissed, but the hypothesis on its physiological and pathological role are heterogeneous and often discordant. It has been described a positive feedback loop from the γ- to the β-secretase cleavages of Aβ precursor protein, which is activated by mutations of Presenilin 1 (PS1), the catalytic core of the γ-secretase. These findings show that Aβ precursor protein as well the activity of the γ-secretase are required to obtain the up-regulation of β-secretase which is induced by Presenilin 1 mutations. Then, Aβ 1-42 is the Aβ precursor protein derivative that up-regulates the expression of β-secretase, and c-jun N-terminal kinase (JNK)/c-Jun and ERK1/2 are involved. Here, we describe the activation of β-secretase and c-jun N-terminal kinase related proteins by monomeric Aβ 1-42, defining the conditions that most efficiently strike the described signaling without producing toxicity. Taken together these data imply that monomeric Aβ 1-42, at non-toxic concentrations and time frames, are able to induce a signaling pathway that leads to transcriptional activation of β-secretase.

Number:  150
UID:  22701601
Founded words:  ['functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  In order to identify novel chemical classes of β-secretase (BACE-1) inhibitors, an alternative scoring protocol, Principal Component Analysis (PCA), was proposed to summarize most of the information from the original scoring functions and re-rank the results from the virtual screening against BACE-1.

Number:  151
UID:  22701601
Founded words:  ['functions', 'functions', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  Given a training set (50 BACE-1 inhibitors and 9950 inactive diverse compounds), three rank-based virtual screening methods, individual scoring, conventional consensus scoring and PCA, were judged by the hit number in the top 1% of the ranked list. The docking poses were generated by Surflex, five scoring functions (Surflex_Score, D_Score, G_Score, ChemScore, and PMF_Score) were used for pose extraction. For each pose group, twelve scoring functions (Surflex_Score, D_Score, G_Score, ChemScore, PMF_Score, LigScore1, LigScore2, PLP1, PLP2, jain, Ludi_1, and Ludi_2) were used for the pose rank. For a test set, 113,228 chemical compounds (Sigma-Aldrich® corporate chemical directory) were docked by Surflex, then ranked by the same three ranking methods motioned above to select the potential active compounds for experimental test.

Number:  152
UID:  22664922
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'binding', 'bind', 'binding', 'bind', 'mediated', 'regulation', 'regulatory', 'regulatory', 'regulation']
Abstract:  Polyglutamine diseases are a class of neurodegenerative disorders characterized by expansion of polyglutamine repeats, protein aggregation and neuronal cell death in specific regions of the brain. The expansion of a polyglutamine repeat in the TATA binding protein (TBP) causes a neurodegenerative disease, Spinocerebellar Ataxia 17 (SCA17). This disease is characterized by intranuclear protein aggregates and selective loss of cerebellar neurons, including Purkinje cells. MicroRNAs are small, endogenous, regulatory non-coding RNA molecules that bind to messenger RNAs with partial complementarity and interfere in their expression. Here, we used a cellular model of SCA17 where we expressed TBP with 16 (normal) or 59 (pathogenic) polyglutamines and found differential expression of several microRNAs. Specifically, we found two microRNAs, miR-29a/b, were down-regulated. With miR-29a/b down regulation, we found an increased expression of targets of miR-29a/b -beta-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1), p53 upregulated modulator of apoptosis (PUMA) and BAK, increased cytochrome c release and apoptosis. Restoration of miR-29a/b in the pathogenic polyglutamine background reduced the BACE1expression. While, antagomiRs against miR-29a/b resulted in an increase in BACE1 levels and neuronal apoptosis. In spite of the elevation of BACE1 in Alzhemiers disease, its role in neuronal cell death has not been established. Here, we show that increased BACE1 expression is not sufficient to cause apoptosis. However restoring level of BACE1 to normal in polyglutamine cells partially reduced neuronal apoptosis. We show a role for the miR-29a/b-BACE1 regulatory interaction in SCA17, suggesting that this microRNA could be part of a common molecular mechanism leading to neuronal cell death in multiple neurodegenerative disorders. The identification of a common mechanism of microRNA mediated neurodegeneration not only improves our understanding of the process, but also provides promising and novel therapeutic targets.

Number:  153
UID:  22654105
Founded words:  ['activated', 'activates', 'regulated']
Abstract:  Anatomical lesions in Alzheimer disease-affected brains mainly consist of senile plaques, inflammation stigmata, and oxidative stress. The nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) is a stress-activated transcription factor that is activated around senile plaques. We have assessed whether NF-κB could be differentially regulated at physiological or supraphysiological levels of amyloid β (Aβ) peptides. Under these experimental conditions, we delineated the putative NF-κB-dependent modulation of all cellular participants in Aβ production, namely its precursor βAPP (β-amyloid precursor protein) and the β- and γ-secretases, the two enzymatic machines involved in Aβ genesis. Under physiological conditions, NF-κB lowers the transcriptional activity of the promoters of βAPP, β-secretase (β-site APP-cleaving enzyme 1, BACE1), and of the four protein components (Aph-1, Pen-2, nicastrin, presenilin-1, or presenilin-2) of the γ-secretase in HEK293 cells. This was accompanied by a reduction of both protein levels and enzymatic activities, thereby ultimately yielding lower amounts of Aβ and AICD (APP intracellular domain). In stably transfected Swedish βAPP-expressing HEK293 cells triggering supraphysiological concentrations of Aβ peptides, NF-κB activates the transcription of βAPP, BACE1, and some of the γ-secretase members and increases protein expression and enzymatic activities, resulting in enhanced Aβ production. Our pharmacological approach using distinct NF-κB kinase modulators indicates that both NF-κB canonical and alternative pathways are involved in the control of Aβ production. Overall, our data demonstrate that under physiological conditions, NF-κB triggers a repressive effect on Aβ production that contributes to maintaining its homeostasis, while NF-κB participates in a degenerative cycle where Aβ would feed its own production under pathological conditions.

Number:  154
UID:  22627185
Founded words:  ['activation']
Abstract:  A deficit in reversal phase learning in the Morris water maze was observed in female mice and was paralleled by evidence of increased accumulation of Aβ, microglial activation and expression of IL-1β. Accumulation of Aβ was coupled with an increase in expression of BACE-1 and a decrease in insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE).

Number:  155
UID:  22590542
Founded words:  ['associated', 'associated', 'regulated', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Neuregulin 1 (NRG1) is a key candidate susceptibility gene for both schizophrenia (SCZ) and bipolar disorder (BPD). The function of the NRG1 transmembrane proteins is regulated by cleavage. Alteration of membrane bound-NRG1 cleavage has been previously shown to be associated with behavioral impairments in mouse models lacking expression of NRG1-cleavage enzymes such as BACE1 and gamma secretase. We sought to determine whether alterations in NRG1 cleavage and associated enzymes occur in patients with SCZ and BPD.

Number:  156
UID:  22590542
Founded words:  ['associated']
Abstract:  Our preliminary findings suggest region-specific alterations in NRG1 cleavage in SCZ and BPD patients. These changes may be associated with specific symptoms in these psychiatric disorders.

Number:  157
UID:  22553349
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'mediates', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  The β-site amyloid precursor protein (APP)-cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) is a transmembrane aspartyl protease that catalyzes the proteolytic processing of APP and other plasma membrane protein precursors. BACE1 cycles between the trans-Golgi network (TGN), the plasma membrane, and endosomes by virtue of signals contained within its cytosolic C-terminal domain. One of these signals is the DXXLL-motif sequence DISLL, which controls transport between the TGN and endosomes via interaction with GGA proteins. Here we show that the DISLL sequence is embedded within a longer [DE]XXXL[LI]-motif sequence, DDISLL, which mediates internalization from the plasma membrane by interaction with the clathrin-associated, heterotetrameric adaptor protein 2 (AP-2) complex. Mutation of this signal or knockdown of either AP-2 or clathrin decreases endosomal localization and increases plasma membrane localization of BACE1. Remarkably, internalization-defective BACE1 is able to cleave an APP mutant that itself cannot be delivered to endosomes. The drug brefeldin A reversibly prevents BACE1-catalyzed APP cleavage, ruling out that this reaction occurs in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) or ER-Golgi intermediate compartment. Taken together, these observations support the notion that BACE1 is capable of cleaving APP in late compartments of the secretory pathway.

Number:  158
UID:  22534065
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activators', 'associated', 'regulator']
Abstract:  Few studies have compared the processing of endogenous human amyloid precursor protein (APP) in younger and older neurons. Here, we characterized LUHMES cells as a human model to study Alzheimer's disease-related processes during neuronal maturation and aging. Differentiated LUHMES expressed and spontaneously processed APP via the secretase pathways, and they secreted amyloid β (Aβ) peptide. This was inhibited by cholesterol depletion or secretase inhibition, but not by block of tau phosphorylation. In vitro aged cells increased Aβ secretion without upregulation of APP or secretases. We identified the medium constituent glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) as responsible for this effect. GDNF-triggered Aβ release was associated with rapid upregulation of the GDNF coreceptor "rearranged during transfection" (RET). Other direct (neurturin) or indirect (nerve growth factor) RET activators also increased Aβ, whereas different neurotrophins were ineffective. Downstream of RET, we found activation of protein kinase B (AKT) to be involved. Accordingly, inhibitors of the AKT regulator phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase completely blocked GDNF-triggered AKT phosphorylation and Aβ increase. This suggests that RET signaling affects Aβ release from aging neurons.

Number:  159
UID:  22490781
Founded words:  ['regulated', 'regulated', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder of the central nervous system. The proteolytic processing of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) into the β-amyloid (Aβ) peptide is a central event in AD. While the pathway that generates Aβ is well described, many questions remain concerning general APP metabolism and its metabolites. It is becoming clear that the amino-terminal region of APP can be processed to release small N-terminal fragments (NTFs). The purpose of this study was to investigate the occurrence and generation of APP NTFs in vivo and in cell culture (SH-SY5Y) in order to delineate the cellular pathways implicated in their generation. We were able to detect 17- to 28-kDa APP NTFs in human and mouse brain tissue that are distinct from N-APP fragments previously reported. We show that the 17- to 28-kDa APP NTFs were highly expressed in mice from the age of 2 wk to adulthood. SH-SY5Y studies indicate the generation of APP NTFs involves a novel APP processing pathway, regulated by protein kinase C, but independent of α-secretase or β-secretase 1 (BACE) activity. These results identify a novel, developmentally regulated APP processing pathway that may play an important role in the physiological function of APP.

Number:  160
UID:  22480948
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interactions']
Abstract:  Beta-secretase 1 (BACE1) is a central nervous system (CNS) aspartyl protease required for production of amyloid beta (Aβ) peptides. Brain-penetrant BACE1 inhibitors are central to test the 'amyloid hypothesis', which suggests that a reduction of Aβ species in the CNS would halt or even reverse Alzheimer's disease. Discovery of the iminoheterocycle class of BACE1 inhibitors (which show robust efficacy in reduction of CNS Aβ species in animal models) marked an important milestone. These discoveries arose independently from multiple research laboratories that took different paths to end at the same scaffolds. These druggable motifs should be applicable to other aspartyl proteases of therapeutic importance and also to other protein targets involving crucial interactions with carboxylic acid side chains. Here, a comparison of these approaches to BACE1 discovery will showcase how it is important to pay attention to the intrinsic physicochemical properties of the lead series, even at the very early stage of drug discovery.

Number:  161
UID:  22468999
Founded words:  ['binder']
Abstract:  The aspartyl protease β-secretase, or BACE, has been demonstrated to be a key factor in the proteolytic formation of Aβ-peptide, a major component of plaques in the brains of Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients, and inhibition of this enzyme has emerged as a major strategy for pharmacologic intervention in AD. An X-ray-based fragment screen of Pfizer's proprietary fragment collection has resulted in the identification of a novel BACE binder featuring spiropyrrolidine framework. Although exhibiting only weak inhibitory activity against the BACE enzyme, the small compound was verified by biophysical and NMR-based methods as a bona fide BACE inhibitor. Subsequent optimization of the lead compound, relying heavily on structure-based drug design and computational prediction of physiochemical properties, resulted in a nearly 1000-fold improvement in potency while maintaining ligand efficiency and properties predictive of good permeability and low P-gp liability.

Number:  162
UID:  22459076
Founded words:  ['binding', 'bind', 'binding', 'bind']
Abstract:  Fragment-based drug discovery (FBDD) has become established in both industry and academia as an alternative approach to high-throughput screening for the generation of chemical leads for drug targets. In FBDD, specialised detection methods are used to identify small chemical compounds (fragments) that bind to the drug target, and structural biology is usually employed to establish their binding mode and to facilitate their optimisation. In this article, we present three recent and successful case histories in FBDD. We then re-examine the key concepts and challenges of FBDD with particular emphasis on recent literature and our own experience from a substantial number of FBDD applications. Our opinion is that careful application of FBDD is living up to its promise of delivering high quality leads with good physical properties and that in future many drug molecules will be derived from fragment-based approaches.

Number:  163
UID:  22455478
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activate', 'bind', 'bind', 'mediated', 'mediated', 'regulates', 'functions', 'function', 'function', 'functions']
Abstract:  Neuregulin-1 (NRG1), known also as heregulin, acetylcholine receptor inducing activity (ARIA), glial growth factor (GGF), or sensory and motor neuron derived factor (SMDF), plays essential roles in several developmental processes, and is required also later in life. Many variants of NRG1 are produced via alternative splicing and usage of distinct promoters. All contain an epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like domain, which alone is sufficient to bind and activate the cognate receptors, members of the ErbB family. NRG1 mediated signaling is crucial for cardiogenesis and the development of the mammary gland and ErbB2 (HER2), an orphan co-receptor for NRG1 is the target of the drug Herceptin� (trastuzumab) used for treatment of metastatic breast cancer. In the nervous system, NRG1 controls the early development of subpopulations of neural crest cells. In particular, NRG1 acts as an essential paracrine signaling molecule expressed on the axonal surface, where it signals to Schwann cells throughout development and regulates the thickness of the myelin sheath. NRG1 is required also by other cell types in the nervous system, for instance as an axonal signal released by proprioceptive afferents to induce development of the muscle spindle, and it controls aspects of cortical interneuron development as well as the formation of thalamocortical projections. Work from several laboratories implicates dysregulation of NRG1/ErbB4 signaling in the etiology of schizophrenia. Biochemical studies have shown that the precursor proteins of NRG1 can be released from the membrane through limited proteolysis. In addition, most NRG1 isoforms contain a transmembrane domain, which is processed by γ-secretase after shedding. Thereby the intracellular domain is released into the cytoplasm. Despite this, the importance of NRG1 cleavage for its functions in vivo remained unclear until recently. β- Secretase (β-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme 1, BACE1) was first identified through its function as the rate limiting enzyme of amyloid-β-peptide (Aβ) production. Aβ is the major component of amyloid plaques in Alzheimer's disease (AD). More recently it was shown that Neuregulin-1 is a major physiological substrate of BACE1 during early postnatal development. Mutant mice lacking BACE1 display severe hypomyelination of peripheral nerves similar to that seen in mice lacking NRG1/ErbB signaling in Schwann cells, and a BACE1-dependent activation of NRG1 in the process of peripheral myelination was proposed. Here we summarize the current knowledge about the role of NRG1 proteolysis for ErbB receptor mediated signaling during development and in Alzheimer's disease.

Number:  164
UID:  22449099
Founded words:  ['functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  Previously, we found that β-galactoside α2,6-sialyltransferase (ST6Gal I), an enzyme that adds sialic acids to N-linked oligosaccharides of glycoproteins and is frequently overexpressed in cancer cells, is up-regulated by ionizing radiation (IR) and cleaved to a form possessing catalytic activity comparable to that of the Golgi-localized enzyme. Moreover, this soluble form is secreted into the culture media. Induction of ST6Gal I significantly increased the migration of colon cancer cells via sialylation of integrin β1. Here, we further investigated the mechanisms underlying ST6Gal I cleavage, solubilization and release from cells, and addressed its functions, focusing primarily on cancer cell migration.

Number:  165
UID:  22449099
Founded words:  ['mediating']
Abstract:  We found that ST6Gal I was cleaved by BACE1 (β-site amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzyme), which was specifically overexpressed in response to IR. The soluble form of ST6Gal I, which also has sialyltransferase enzymatic activity, was cleaved from the Golgi membrane and then released into the culture media. Both non-cleaved and cleaved forms of ST6Gal I significantly increased colon cancer cell migration in a sialylation-dependent manner. The pro-migratory effect of the non-cleaved form of ST6Gal I was dependent on integrin β1 sialylation, whereas that of the cleaved form of ST6Gal I was not, suggesting that other intracellular sialylated molecules apart from cell surface molecules such as integrin β1 might be involved in mediating the pro-migratory effects of the soluble form of ST6Gal I. Moreover, production of soluble form ST6Gal I by BACE 1 inhibited integrin β1 sialylation and migration by Golgi-anchored form of ST6Gal I.

Number:  166
UID:  22407769
Founded words:  ['bind', 'bind', 'regulatory']
Abstract:  Progressive cerebral deposition of Aβ in the brain is a seminal event in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Aβ is generated from the amyloid precursor protein (APP) by proteolytic processing of β-secretase (BACE1) and γ-secretase. Consequently, BACE1, a key enzyme in the production of Aβ, is a prime target for therapeutic intervention in AD. In the course of screening for natural BACE1 inhibitors from Corni fructus, the ethyl acetate (EtOAc) fraction showed significant inhibitory activity against BACE1. By activity guided purification, three compounds of BACE1 inhibitors p-coumaric acid, gallic acid and ursolic acid were isolated from Corni fructus EtOAc fraction. All isolated compounds suppressed BACE1 in a dose dependent manner. p-Coumaric acid, in particular, exhibited significant inhibitory activity against BACE1 with 9.0 × 10(-5)  m and a K(i) value of 1.9 × 10(-6)  m. Also this compound was non-competitive with a substrate in the Dixon plot, suggesting that it might bind either to the β-secretase subsite or to another regulatory site. All compounds showed no significant attenuation of TACE (α-secretase) and other serine proteases such as chymotrypsin and trypsin, demonstrating that they were relatively selective and specific inhibitors of BACE1. These novel findings suggest that Corni fructus contains biologically active components that may be used to attenuate the progression and/or prevention of Alzheimer's disease.

Number:  167
UID:  22393721
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  To generate active recombinant human beta-secreatase (BACE1) for studying its interaction with its inhibitors, we constructed two recombinant plasmids, pPIC9K-MetBACE22 (bearing pro-bace1 gene) and pPIC9K-MetBACE46 (bearing bace1 gene). These two plasmids were then transformed into Pichia pastoris GS115 by electroporation to obtain the recombinant strains 9k-B22 and 9k-B46. After induction in buffered methanol complex medium, we found the supernatant activity of 9k-B22 significantly higher than that of 9k-B46. The culture filtrate of 9k-B22 was concentrated, and then purified by HisTrap affinity column. The purified proteins, showing good BACE1 protease activity, were found to be a mixture of glycoproteins because they can be stained by periodic acid-Schiff reagent. After this mixture was treated with Endo H(f) (a recombinant protein of endoglycosidase H), we found two new adjacent bands around 50 kDa on SDS-PAGE. These two bands were cut and subjected to peptide mass fingerprint analysis, and identified as proBACE1 and BACE1 proteins. Enzyme assays revealed that the activities of both BACE1 proteins in glycosylated and deglycosylated form were lower than that of commercial BACE1 (expressed in HEK-293), inferring glycosylation and the type of glycosylation are crucial to the activity. However, we found no apparent difference in the inhibition of those all above three enzyme forms by one known BACE1 inhibitor. This observation demonstrated that the glycosylation of BACE1 by Pichia pastoris does not affect its interaction with this inhibitor. After optimization of culture conditions, the production of BACE1 in Pichia pastoris was enhanced to about 1 mg/L. This work enables us to further investigate the interaction of BACE1 and its inhibitors, and assists in discovering and optimizing BACE1 inhibitors as anti-Alzheimer's disease agents.

Number:  168
UID:  22380629
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'complexes']
Abstract:  Structure-based design of a series of cyclic hydroxyethylamine BACE1 inhibitors allowed the rational incorporation of prime- and nonprime-side fragments to a central core template without any amide functionality. The core scaffold selection and the structure-activity relationship development were supported by molecular modeling studies and by X-ray analysis of BACE1 complexes with various ligands to expedite the optimization of the series. The direct extension from P1-aryl- and heteroaryl moieties into the S3 binding pocket allowed the enhancement of potency and selectivity over cathepsin D. Restraining the design and synthesis of compounds to a physicochemical property space consistent with central nervous system drugs led to inhibitors with improved blood-brain barrier permeability. Guided by structure-based optimization, we were able to obtain highly potent compounds such as 60p with enzymatic and cellular IC(50) values of 2 and 50 nM, respectively, and with >200-fold selectivity over cathepsin D. Pharmacodynamic studies in APP51/16 transgenic mice at oral doses of 180 μmol/kg demonstrated significant reduction of brain Aβ levels.

Number:  169
UID:  22351782
Founded words:  ['interacts', 'interacts', 'mediate', 'mediate', 'mediates', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Accumulation of the neurotoxic β-amyloid (Aβ) peptide in the brain is central to the pathogenesis of Alzheimer disease. Aβ is derived from the β-amyloid precursor protein (APP) through sequential cleavages by β- and γ-secretases, and the production of Aβ is greatly affected by the subcellular localization of these factors. CUTA, the mammalian CutA divalent cation tolerance homolog (E. coli), has been proposed to mediate acetylcholinesterase activity and copper homeostasis, which are important in Alzheimer disease pathology. However, the exact function of CUTA remains largely unclear. Here we show that human CUTA has several variants that differ in their N-terminal length and are separated as heavy (H) and light (L) components. The H component has the longest N terminus and is membrane-associated, whereas the L component is N-terminally truncated at various sites and localized in the cytosol. Importantly, we demonstrate that the H component of CUTA interacts through its N terminus with the transmembrane domain of β-site APP cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1), the putative β-secretase, mainly in the Golgi/trans-Golgi network. Overexpression and RNA interference knockdown of CUTA can reduce and increase BACE1-mediated APP processing/Aβ secretion, respectively. RNA interference of CUTA decelerates intracellular trafficking of BACE1 from the Golgi/trans-Golgi network to the cell surface and reduces the steady-state level of cell surface BACE1. Our results identify the H component of CUTA as a novel BACE1-interacting protein that mediates the intracellular trafficking of BACE1 and the processing of APP to Aβ.

Number:  170
UID:  22325686
Founded words:  ['activation', 'interactions', 'interactions', 'binding', 'binding', 'regulation', 'regulation']
Abstract:  The in vitro activity of human recombinant β-secretase (BACE1) was studied using a fluorogenic substrate based on the cleavage site for the enzyme in the Swedish mutation of amyloid precursor protein. The enzyme was inhibited by a control peptide inhibitor with good repeatability. The enzyme preparation comprised a mixture of pro-enzyme or zymogen and mature enzyme whereby the pro-enzyme sequence forms a 'flap' that can obstruct the binding site. 'Open flap' forms of the zymogen and mature enzyme are active, but the 'closed flap' form of the zymogen is inactive. This mixture of enzyme populations permitted apparent stimulation of enzyme activity under particular conditions, presumably due to facilitating flap-opening of the zymogen. As reported for heparin, enzyme activation was stimulated in the presence of low concentrations of Tween 20 and dimethylsulfoxide before becoming inhibited at higher concentrations. Dietary plant extracts either consistently inhibited (e.g. clove, tea, cinammon) or consistently stimulated (e.g. mushroom, parsley, asparagus) BACE1. Common structural features identified by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy revealed that BACE1 activity could be explained by differential interactions of either small molecule or polymeric species with mature versus zymogen forms of the enzyme, respectively. Further, enzyme activity could be reversed by mixtures of high and low mass species. These results may have implications for the regulation of β-secretase activity in vivo by either endogenous or possibly dietary factors and for a potential role of BACE1 in stimulation of the production of amyloid beta peptide in sporadic Alzheimer's disease.

Number:  171
UID:  22303960
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulate']
Abstract:  β-Site amyloid precursor protein (APP) cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) is the transmembrane aspartyl protease that catalyzes the first cleavage step in the proteolysis of the APP to the amyloid β-protein (Aβ), a process involved in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer disease. BACE1 pre-mRNA undergoes complex alternative splicing, the regulation of which is not well understood. We identified a G-rich sequence within exon 3 of BACE1 involved in controlling splice site selection. Mutation of the G-rich sequence decreased use of the normal 5' splice site of exon 3, which leads to full-length and proteolytically active BACE1, and increased use of an alternative splice site, which leads to a shorter, essentially inactive isoform. Nuclease protection assays, nuclear magnetic resonance, and circular dichroism spectroscopy revealed that this sequence folds into a G-quadruplex structure. Several proteins were identified as capable of binding to the G-rich sequence, and one of these, heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein H, was found to regulate BACE1 exon 3 alternative splicing and in a manner dependent on the G-rich sequence. Knockdown of heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein H led to a decrease in the full-length BACE1 mRNA isoform as well as a decrease in Aβ production from APP, suggesting new possibilities for therapeutic approaches to Alzheimer's disease.

Number:  172
UID:  22275252
Founded words:  ['regulates']
Abstract:  We investigated the molecular mechanism by which 12/15-LO regulates amyloid β (Aβ)/Aβ precursor protein (APP) metabolism in vivo and in vitro by genetic and pharmacologic approaches.

Number:  173
UID:  22275252
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activation', 'regulates']
Abstract:  Here we show that overexpression of 12/15-LO leads to increased levels of β-secretase-1 (BACE1) mRNA and protein, a significant elevation in Aβ levels and deposition, and a worsening of memory deficits in AD transgenic mice. In vitro and in vivo studies demonstrate that 12/15-LO regulates BACE1 mRNA expression levels via the activation of the transcription factor Sp1. Thus, 12/15-LO-overexpressing mice had elevated levels of Sp1 and BACE1, whereas 12/15-LO-deficient mice had reduced levels of both. Preventing Sp1 activation by pharmacologic inhibition or dominant-negative mutant blocks the 12/15-LO-dependent elevation of Aβ and BACE1 levels.

Number:  174
UID:  22249458
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activation', 'activation']
Abstract:  Senile plaques composed of β-amyloid (Aβ) are a pathological hallmark of Alzheimer disease. Presenilin 2 (PS2) mutations increase Aβ generation in the brains of Alzheimer disease patients, but the underlying mechanism of Aβ generation by PS2 mutations remains to be clarified. The Aβ is generated through the sequential cleavage of amyloid precursor protein by β- and γ-secretases. Here, we show that the PS2 mutation N141I enhances the activity of β-secretase and expression of the β-site amyloid precursor protein cleavage enzyme 1, a major neuronal β-secretase in the brains of PS2 transgenic mice and in PC12 cells overexpressing mutant PS2. In parallel with the increased activity of β-secretase, activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), Aβ1-40 and Aβ1-42 levels, generation of reactive oxygen species, and lipid peroxidation were higher in the mutant mouse neurons and the PC12 cells. Colocalization of phosphorylated ERK (phospho-ERK) and β-site amyloid precursor protein cleavage enzyme 1 with hydroxynonenal-histidine was found in the mutant brains. An ERK inhibitor U0126 and an antioxidant N-acetylcysteine prevented the expression and activity of β-secretase, ERK activation, and reactive oxygen species generation in both neurons and PC12 cells expressing mutant PS2 in a dose-dependent manner. Together, these data suggest that oxidative stress-mediated ERK activation contributes to increases in β-secretase and, thus, an increase of Aβ generation in neuronal cells expressing mutant PS2.

Number:  175
UID:  22223749
Founded words:  ['interact', 'interact', 'complexes', 'complexes']
Abstract:  Accumulation of the amyloid β (Aβ) peptide derived from the amyloid precursor protein (APP) plays a central role in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). We previously reported that the scaffolding protein RanBP9 is markedly increased in AD brains and promotes Aβ generation by scaffolding APP/BACE1/LRP complexes together and accelerating APP endocytosis. Because APP, LRP, and RanBP9 all physically interact with β-integrins, we investigated whether RanBP9 alters integrin-dependent cell adhesion and focal adhesion signaling. Here, we show that RanBP9 overexpression dramatically disrupts integrin-dependent cell attachment and spreading in NIH3T3 and hippocampus-derived HT22 cells, concomitant with strongly decreased Pyk2/paxillin signaling and talin/vinculin localization in focal adhesion complexes. Conversely, RanBP9 knockdown robustly promotes cell attachment, spreading, and focal adhesion signaling and assembly. Cell surface biotinylation and endocytosis assays reveal that RanBP9 overexpression and RanBP9 siRNA potently reduces and increases surface β1-integrin and LRP by accelerating and inhibiting their endocytosis, respectively. Primary hippocampal neurons derived from RanBP9-transgenic mice also demonstrate severely reduced levels of surface β1-integrin, LRP, and APP, as well as neurite arborization. Therefore, these data indicate that RanBP9 simultaneously inhibits cell-adhesive processes and enhances Aβ generation by accelerating APP, LRP, and β1-integrin endocytosis.

Number:  176
UID:  22194329
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'associated', 'interaction', 'binding', 'binding', 'complexes']
Abstract:  β-Secretase (β-site amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzyme 1; BACE1) is a transmembrane aspartic protease that cleaves the β-amyloid precursor protein en route to generation of the amyloid β-peptide (Aβ) that is believed to be responsible for the Alzheimer's disease amyloid cascade. It is thus a prime target for the development of inhibitors which may serve as drugs in the treatment and/or prevention of Alzheimer's disease. In the following determination of the crystal structures of both apo and complexed BACE1, structural analysis of all crystal structures of BACE1 deposited in the PDB and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of monomeric and `dimeric' BACE1 were used to study conformational changes in the active-site region of the enzyme. It was observed that a flap able to cover the active site is the most flexible region, adopting multiple conformational states in the various crystal structures. Both the presence or absence of an inhibitor within the active site and the crystal packing are shown to influence the flap's conformation. An open conformation of the flap is mostly observed in the apo structures, while direct hydrogen-bonding interaction between main-chain atoms of the flap and the inhibitor is a prerequisite for the flap to adopt a closed conformation in the crystal structures of complexes. Thus, a systematic study of the conformational flexibility of the enzyme may not only contribute to structure-based drug design of BACE1 inhibitors and of other targets with flexible conformations, but may also help to better understand the mechanistic events associated with the binding of substrates and inhibitors to the enzyme.

Number:  177
UID:  22166205
Founded words:  ['activation', 'regulated', 'regulated', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  BACE1, which cleaves the amyloid precursor protein, is the rate-limiting enzyme for β-amyloid peptide production, leading to the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). A high plasma level of homocysteine, acting as a potent methyltransferase inhibitor, is assumed to be a risk factor for AD onset. Using the demethylating drug 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-Aza), we tested whether and how BACE1 expression is regulated in mouse BV-2 microglial cells. 5-Aza increased both BACE1 mRNA and protein levels in a dose-dependent manner. Bisulfite-sequencing analysis revealed that two CpG sites at positions +298 and +351 in the 5'-untranslated region (5'-UTR) of the BACE1 gene were specifically demethylated in BV-2 cells treated with 5-Aza. In silico analysis showed that the +351 site is the STAT3/CTCF-binding site; the function of the +298 site has not been identified. To assess whether these two CpG sites play an important role in 5-Aza-induced transcriptional activation of BACE1, we constructed a BACE1 gene promoter including the 5'-UTR (-1136 to +500) fused to a CpG-free luciferase gene (pCpGL-BACE1) and its mutant pCpGL-BACE1-AA, which has substituted CG dinucleotides at the two CpG sites of pCpGL-BACE1 to AA. Promoter analysis showed a significant decrease (∼30%) in the activity of pCpGL-BACE1-AA compared with that of pCpGL-BACE1. Furthermore, in vitro methylation of these two reporter constructs showed a complete silencing of their promoter activities. Our data demonstrate that BACE1 gene expression is regulated by DNA methylation of at least two CpG sites at positions +298 and +351 in the 5'-UTR in BV-2 microglial cells.

Number:  178
UID:  22120156
Founded words:  ['associated', 'regulate', 'regulated', 'functions', 'functions', 'functions', 'function', 'function', 'functions', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  Alzheimer's disease causing mutations in the amyloid precursor protein (APP) or in the Presenilin 1 (PS1) or Presenilin 2 (PS2) genes increase the production of amyloid peptides (Aβ) that precipitate in amyloid plaques. Since amyloid plaques are also a prominent feature of sporadic Alzheimer's disease (AD), abnormal proteolysis of APP and the generation of amyloid beta (Aβ) are key events in the pathogenesis of AD. The proteases (secretases) that cleave APP are therefore important therapeutic targets, both for the rare familial forms but likely also for the sporadic forms of AD. The identification and understanding of the (neuro)biological functions of the α-, β-, and presenilin/γ-secretase (complexes) is important for the development of drugs and the delineation of their associated side effects. The potential impact of this type of research exceeds the AD field since the function of these secretases are also linked to cellular pathways like ectodomain shedding of growth factors and regulated intramembrane proteolysis of receptors in developmental biology, tissue homeostasis, and tumorigenesis. The generation of mice deficient in presenilin 1, presenilin 2, the α-secretase ADAM10, and the β-secretases BACE1 and BACE2 were instrumental for the elucidation of the physiological functions of these proteases. Using these mouse models understanding how these secretases regulate amyloid peptide formation and how they exert their diverse biological functions could be significantly increased. This review attempts to summarize selected aspects of the current view of the multiple roles such proteases play in health and disease.

Number:  179
UID:  22113787
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  The preparation of novel fluorinated allylamines and their use as key fragments for the stereoselective synthesis of hydroxyethyl secondary amine (HEA)-type peptidomimetics is described. Our strategy employs chiral sulfinyl imines as synthesis intermediates, by treatment of hemiaminal precursors with two equivalents of vinylmagnesium bromide. The subsequent oxidation of the allylic amines to the corresponding epoxides was achieved by treatment with methyl(trifluoromethyl)dioxirane. Finally, epoxide ring opening with a range of nitrogen nucleophiles provided a library of HEA-derived peptidomimetics with a phenyldifluoromethylene moiety. The biological evaluation of these derivatives revealed compounds with remarkable BACE1 inhibitory activity. Docking studies revealed the influence of the fluorine atoms in the binding mode of the synthesized ligands. Furthermore, the biological evaluation of our final products and synthesis intermediates led to the discovery of compounds with antimicrobial activity against Mycobacterium and Nocardia species.

Number:  180
UID:  22090490
Founded words:  ['mediate', 'mediate']
Abstract:  DNA methylation is an epigenetic mechanism for gene silencing engaged by DNA methyltransferase (Dnmt)-catalyzed methyl group transfer to cytosine residues in gene-regulatory regions. It is unknown whether aberrant DNA methylation can cause neurodegeneration. We tested the hypothesis that Dnmts can mediate neuronal cell death. Enforced expression of Dnmt3a induced degeneration of cultured NSC34 cells. During apoptosis of NSC34 cells induced by camptothecin, levels of Dnmt1 and Dnmt3a increased fivefold and twofold, respectively, and 5-methylcytosine accumulated in nuclei. Truncation mutation of the Dnmt3a catalytic domain and Dnmt3a RNAi blocked apoptosis of cultured neurons. Inhibition of Dnmt catalytic activity with RG108 and procainamide protected cultured neurons from excessive DNA methylation and apoptosis. In vivo, Dnmt1 and Dnmt3a are expressed differentially during mouse brain and spinal cord maturation and in adulthood when Dnmt3a is abundant in synapses and mitochondria. Dnmt1 and Dnmt3a are expressed in motor neurons of adult mouse spinal cord, and, during their apoptosis induced by sciatic nerve avulsion, nuclear and cytoplasmic 5-methylcytosine immunoreactivity, Dnmt3a protein levels and Dnmt enzyme activity increased preapoptotically. Inhibition of Dnmts with RG108 blocked completely the increase in 5-methycytosine and the apoptosis of motor neurons in mice. In human amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), motor neurons showed changes in Dnmt1, Dnmt3a, and 5-methylcytosine similar to experimental models. Thus, motor neurons can engage epigenetic mechanisms to drive apoptosis, involving Dnmt upregulation and increased DNA methylation. These cellular mechanisms could be relevant to human ALS pathobiology and disease treatment.

Number:  181
UID:  22076470
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'functions', 'function', 'function', 'function', 'function', 'functions']
Abstract:  We present three complementary approaches for score-tuning that improve docking performance in pose prediction, virtual screening and binding affinity assessment. The methodology utilizes experimental data to customize the scoring function for the system of interest considering the specific docking scenario. The tuning approach, which has been implemented as an automated utility in eHiTS, is introduced as a solution to one of the conundrums of the molecular docking paradigm, namely, the lack of a universally well performing scoring function. The accuracy of scoring functions has been shown to be generally system-dependent, and particularly lacking for binding energy and bio-activity predictions. In the proposed approach, pose and energy predictions are enhanced by adjusting the relative weights of the eHiTS energy terms to improve score-RMSD or score-affinity correlations. In a virtual screening context ligand-based similarity is used to rescale the docking score such that better enrichment factors are achieved. We discuss the algorithmic details of the methods, and demonstrate the effects of score tuning on a variety of targets, including CDK2, BACE1 and neuraminidase, as well as on the popular benchmarks--the Directory of Useful Decoys and the PDBBind database.

Number:  182
UID:  22052506
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activates', 'regulator', 'regulate']
Abstract:  Myelin sheath thickness is precisely adjusted to axon caliber, and in the peripheral nervous system, neuregulin 1 (NRG1) type III is a key regulator of this process. It has been proposed that the protease BACE1 activates NRG1 dependent myelination. Here, we characterize the predicted product of BACE1-mediated NRG1 type III processing in transgenic mice. Neuronal overexpression of a NRG1 type III-variant, designed to mimic prior cleavage in the juxtamembrane stalk region, induces hypermyelination in vivo and is sufficient to restore myelination of NRG1 type III-deficient neurons. This observation implies that the NRG1 cytoplasmic domain is dispensable and that processed NRG1 type III is sufficient for all steps of myelination. Surprisingly, transgenic neuronal overexpression of full-length NRG1 type III promotes hypermyelination also in BACE1 null mutant mice. Moreover, NRG1 processing is impaired but not abolished in BACE1 null mutants. Thus, BACE1 is not essential for the activation of NRG1 type III to promote myelination. Taken together, these findings suggest that multiple neuronal proteases collectively regulate NRG1 processing.

Number:  183
UID:  22045484
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex', 'regulatory']
Abstract:  Oxygen homeostasis is essential for the development and normal physiology of an organism. Hypoxia causes the mitochondrial electron transport chain to generate higher levels of reactive oxygen species resulting in oxidative stress. Hypoxia can be a direct consequence of hypoperfusion, a common vascular component among Alzheimer's disease (AD) risk factors, and may play an important role in AD pathogenesis. Beta-site amyloid-β A4 precursor protein-cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) is responsible, with γ-secretase, for cleavage of the amyloid-β protein precursor (AβPP) to produce amyloid-β (Aβ) peptide. A recent study observed that oxidative stress increases BACE1 expression via a regulatory pathway dependent on γ-secretase cleavage of AβPP and this increases Aβ peptide production. Zebrafish embryos represent normal cells in which complex and subtle manipulations of gene activity can be performed to facilitate analysis of genes involved in human disease. Here we identify and describe the expression of bace1, the zebrafish ortholog of human BACE1. We observe that the zebrafish AD-related genes bace1, psen1, psen2, appa, and appb all show increased mRNA levels under hypoxia. A dominant negative form of psen1 putatively blocking γ-secretase activity blocks bace1 upregulation under hypoxia. Hypoxia increases catalase gene mRNA indicating increased oxidative stress but we did not observe increased levels of F2-isoprostanes that indicate peroxidation of arachidonic acid, possibly due to relatively low levels of arachidonic acid in zebrafish. Our results demonstrate that upregulation of PSEN1 & 2, AβPP and the γ-secretase-dependent upregulation of BACE1 is an ancient, conserved, and thus selectively advantageous response to hypoxia/oxidative stress.

Number:  184
UID:  22036964
Founded words:  ['associated', 'mediated', 'mediated']
Abstract:  Cerebral amyloid β (Aβ) accumulation is pathogenically associated with sporadic Alzheimer's disease (SAD). BACE-1 is involved in Aβ generation while insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE) partakes in Aβ proteolytic clearance. Vulnerable regions in AD brains show increased BACE-1 protein levels and enzymatic activity while the opposite occurs with IDE. Another common feature in SAD brains is Notch1 overexpression. Here we demonstrate an increase in mRNA levels of Hey-1, a Notch target gene, and a decrease of IDE transcripts in the hippocampus of SAD brains as compared to controls. Transient transfection of Notch intracellular domain (NICD) in N2aSW cells, mouse neuroblastoma cells (N2a) stably expressing human amyloid precursor protein (APP) Swedish mutation, reduce IDE mRNA levels, promoting extracellular Aβ accumulation. Also, NICD, HES-1 and Hey-1 overexpression result in decreased IDE proximal promoter activity. This effect was mediated by 2 functional sites located at -379/-372 and -310-303 from the first translation start site in the -575/-19 (556 bp) fragment of IDE proximal promoter. By site-directed mutagenesis of the IDE promoter region we reverted the inhibitory effect mediated by NICD transfection suggesting that these sites are indeed responsible for the Notch-mediated inhibition of the IDE gene expression. Intracranial injection of the Notch ligand JAG-1 in Tg2576 mice, expressing the Swedish mutation in human APP, induced overexpression of HES-1 and Hey-1 and reduction of IDE mRNA levels, respectively. Our results support our theory that a Notch-dependent IDE transcriptional modulation may impact on Aβ metabolism providing a functional link between Notch signaling and the amyloidogenic pathway in SAD.

Number:  185
UID:  22002568
Founded words:  ['associated', 'mediated', 'regulation', 'regulation']
Abstract:  Huperzine A (HupA) is a potent acetylcholinesterase inhibitor (AChEI) used in the treatment of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Recently, HupA was shown to be active in modulating the nonamyloidogenic metabolism of β-amyloid precursor protein (APP) in APP-transfected human embryonic kidney cell line (HEK293swe). However, in vivo research concerning the mechanism of HupA in APP transgenic mice has not yet been fully elucidated. The present study indicates that the loss of dendritic spine density and synaptotagmin levels in the brain of APPswe/presenilin-1 (PS1) transgenic mice was significantly ameliorated by chronic HupA treatment and provides evidence that this neuroprotection was associated with reduced amyloid plaque burden and oligomeric β-amyloid (Aβ) levels in the cortex and hippocampus of APPswe/PS1dE9 transgenic mice. Our findings further demonstrate that the amelioration effect of HupA on Aβ deposits may be mediated, at least in part, by regulation of the compromised expression of a disintegrin and metalloprotease 10 (ADAM10) and excessive membrane trafficking of β-site APP cleavage enzyme 1 (BACE1) in these transgenic mice. In addition, extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1/2 (Erk1/2) phosphorylation may also be partially involved in the effect of HupA on APP processing. In conclusion, our work for the first time demonstrates the neuroprotective effect of HupA on synaptic deficits in APPswe/PS1dE9 transgenic mice and further clarifies the potential pharmacological targets for this protective effect, in which modulation of nonamyloidogenic and amyloidogenic APP processing pathways may be both involved. These findings may provide adequate evidence for the clinical and experimental benefits gained from HupA treatment.

Number:  186
UID:  21965313
Founded words:  ['association', 'association', 'association']
Abstract:  The role of cholesterol in the etiology of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is still controversial. Some studies exploring the association between lipids and/or lipid lowering treatment and AD indicate a harmful effect of dyslipidemia and a beneficial effect of statin therapy on AD risk. The findings are supported by genetic linkage and association studies that have clearly identified several genes involved in cholesterol metabolism or transport as AD susceptibility genes, including apolipoprotein E, apolipoprotein J, and the sortilin-related receptor. Functional cell biology studies support a critical involvement of lipid raft cholesterol in the modulation of amyloid-β protein precursor (AβPP) processing by β- and γ-secretase resulting in altered amyloid-β production. Contradictory evidence comes from epidemiological studies showing no or controversial association between dyslipidemia and AD risk. Additionally, cell biology studies suggest that there is little exchange between circulating and brain cholesterol, that increased membrane cholesterol is protective by inhibiting loss of membrane integrity through amyloid cytotoxicity, and that cellular cholesterol inhibits co-localization of BACE1 and AβPP in non-raft membrane domains, thereby increasing generation of plasmin, an amyloid-β-degrading enzyme. The aim of this review is to summarize the findings of epidemiological and cell biological studies to elucidate the role of cholesterol in AD etiology.

Number:  187
UID:  21913112
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulate', 'regulates', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  The voltage-gated sodium channel (Nav1) plays an important role in initiating and propagating action potentials in neuronal cells. We and others have recently found that the Alzheimer's disease-related secretases BACE1 and presenilin (PS)/γ-secretase regulate Nav1 function by cleaving auxiliary subunits of the channel complex. We have also shown that elevated BACE1 activity significantly decreases sodium current densities in neuroblastoma cells and acutely dissociated adult hippocampal neurons. For detailed molecular studies of sodium channel regulation, biochemical methods are now complementing classical electrophysiology. To understand how BACE1 regulates sodium current densities in our studies, we setup conditions to analyze surface levels of the pore-forming Nav1 α-subunits. By using a cell surface biotinylation protocol, we found that elevated BACE1 activity significantly decreases surface Nav1 α-subunit levels in both neuroblastoma cells and acutely prepared hippocampal slices. This finding would explain the decreased sodium currents shown by standard electrophysiological methods. The biochemical methods used in our studies would be applicable to analyses of surface expression levels of other ion channels as well as Nav1 in cells and adult hippocampal neurons.

Number:  188
UID:  21897006
Founded words:  ['regulated']
Abstract:  The sequential endoproteolytic cleavages operated by the γ-secretase and the β-secretase (BACE1) on the amyloid-β protein precursor (AβPP) result in the production of the amyloid-β (Aβ) species, with two C-terminal variants, at residue 40 or at residue 42. Accumulation in brain tissue of small, soluble aggregates of Aβ42 is the major pathogenic event of Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, the physiologic activity of Aβ peptides is still elusive. Here, we show that expression of BACE1 is regulated by Aβ42, which augments BACE1 gene transcription through the JNK/c-jun signaling pathway. Of note, Aβ40 has much less effect on BACE1 expression. These findings unveil a positive feedback loop in which γ-secretase cleavage of AβPP releases a functionally-active peptide, Aβ42, that promotes BACE1 transcription. Thus, gene expression induced by Aβ42 may have implications in the neuronal dysfunction and degeneration that occurs in AD.

Number:  189
UID:  21835615
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  The proteolytic enzyme β-secretase (BACE1) plays a central role in the synthesis of the pathogenic β-amyloid in Alzheimer's disease. SAR studies of the S2' region of the BACE1 ligand binding pocket with pyrazolyl and thienyl P2' side chains are reported. These analogs exhibit low nanomolar potency for BACE1, and demonstrate >50- to 100-fold selectivity for the structurally related aspartyl proteases BACE2 and cathepsin D. Small groups attached at the nitrogen of the P2' pyrazolyl moiety, together with the P3 pyrimidine nucleus projecting into the S3 region of the binding pocket, are critical components to ligand's potency and selectivity. P2' thiophene side chain analogs are highly potent BACE1 inhibitors with excellent selectivity against cathepsin D, but only modest selectivity against BACE2. The cell-based activity of these new analogs tracked well with their increased molecular binding with EC(50) values of 0.07-0.2 μM in the ELISA assay for the most potent analogs.

Number:  190
UID:  21825135
Founded words:  ['regulatory']
Abstract:  Amyloid β (Aβ) peptides, the primary constituents of senile plaques and a hallmark in Alzheimer's disease pathology, are generated through the sequential cleavage of amyloid precursor protein (APP) by β-site APP cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) and γ-secretase. The early endosome is thought to represent a major compartment for APP processing; however, the mechanisms of how BACE1 encounters APP are largely unknown. In contrast to APP internalization, which is clathrin-dependent, we demonstrate that BACE1 is sorted to early endosomes via a route controlled by the small GTPase ADP ribosylation factor 6 (ARF6). Altering ARF6 levels or its activity affects endosomal sorting of BACE1, and consequently results in altered APP processing and Aβ production. Furthermore, sorting of newly internalized BACE1 from ARF6-positive towards RAB GTPase 5 (RAB5)-positive early endosomes depends on its carboxyterminal short acidic cluster-dileucine motif. This ARF6-mediated sorting of BACE1 is confined to the somatodendritic compartment of polarized neurons in agreement with Aβ peptides being primarily secreted from here. These results demonstrate a spatial separation between APP and BACE1 during surface-to-endosome transport, suggesting subcellular trafficking as a regulatory mechanism for this proteolytic processing step. It thereby provides a novel avenue to interfere with Aβ production through a selective modulation of the distinct endosomal transport routes used by BACE1 or APP.

Number:  191
UID:  21822802
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  We have previously described a novel artificial NFEV β-secretase (BACE1) cleavage site, which when introduced into the amyloid-β precursor protein (APP), significantly enhances APP cleavage by BACE1 in in vitro and cellular assays. In this study, we describe the identification and characterization of a single chain fragment of variable region (scFv), specific to the EV neo-epitope derived from BACE1 cleavage of the NFEV-containing peptide, and its conversion to IgG1. Both the scFv displayed on phage and EV-IgG1 show exquisite specificity for binding to the EV neoepitope without cross-reactivity to other NFEV containing peptides or WT-APP KMDA cleavage products. EV-IgG1 can detect as little as 0.3 nmol/L of the EV peptide. EV-IgG1 antibody was purified, conjugated with alkaline phosphatase and utilized in various biological assays. In the BACE1 enzymatic assay using NFEV substrate, a BACE1 inhibitor MRK-3 inhibited cleavage with an IC(50) of 2.4 nmol/L with excellent reproducibility. In an APP_NFEV stable SH-SY5Y cellular assay, the EC(50) for inhibition of EV-Aβ peptide secretion with MRK-3 was 236 nmol/L, consistent with values derived using an EV polyclonal antibody. In an APP_NFEV knock-in mouse model, both Aβ_EV40 and Aβ_EV42 peptides in brain homogenate showed excellent gene dosage dependence. In conclusion, the EV neoepitope specific monoclonal antibody is a novel reagent for BACE1 inhibitor discovery for both in vitro, cellular screening assays and in vivo biochemical studies. The methods described herein are generally applicable to novel synthetic substrates and enzyme targets to enable robust screening platforms for enzyme inhibitors.

Number:  192
UID:  21800078
Founded words:  ['activated', 'binds']
Abstract:  Conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) plays important roles in physiological conditions. The aim of present study was to explore the effects of CLA on the cleavage of amyloid precursor protein (APP) and the potential mechanism involved. The effects of CLA on intracellular APP, BACE1 (β-site APP Cleaving Enzyme1, BACE1), a disintegrin and metalloprotease (ADAM10) and extracellular sAPPα (soluble) were analyzed by RT-PCR, Western blot and ELISA in SH-SY5Y cells. Our study indicated that CLA significantly decreased the expression of BACE1 and increased the extracellular secretion of sAPPα, but not affected the levels of APP and ADAM10. The study also revealed that the nuclear receptor peroxisome proliferators activated receptor γ (PPARγ) played an important role in the CLA-induced intracellular BACE1 decrease, as well as the extracellular sAPPα increase through knockdown of PPARγ transcription using siRNA. We hypothesize that CLA acts as an agonist or ligand, which binds with PPARγ and leads to the increase in APP cleavage via α-secretase-mediated pathway and the decrease in the deposition of Aβ.

Number:  193
UID:  21795680
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interacted', 'interaction', 'interacted']
Abstract:  In Alzheimer disease amyloid-β (Aβ) peptides derived from the amyloid precursor protein (APP) accumulate in the brain. Cleavage of APP by the β-secretase BACE1 is the rate-limiting step in the production of Aβ. We have reported previously that the cellular prion protein (PrP(C)) inhibited the action of BACE1 toward human wild type APP (APP(WT)) in cellular models and that the levels of endogenous murine Aβ were significantly increased in PrP(C)-null mouse brain. Here we investigated the molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying this observation. PrP(C) interacted directly with the prodomain of the immature Golgi-localized form of BACE1. This interaction decreased BACE1 at the cell surface and in endosomes where it preferentially cleaves APP(WT) but increased it in the Golgi where it preferentially cleaves APP with the Swedish mutation (APP(Swe)). In transgenic mice expressing human APP with the Swedish and Indiana familial mutations (APP(Swe,Ind)), PrP(C) deletion had no influence on APP proteolytic processing, Aβ plaque deposition, or levels of soluble Aβ or Aβ oligomers. In cells, although PrP(C) inhibited the action of BACE1 on APP(WT), it did not inhibit BACE1 activity toward APP(Swe). The differential subcellular location of the BACE1 cleavage of APP(Swe) relative to APP(WT) provides an explanation for the failure of PrP(C) deletion to affect Aβ accumulation in APP(Swe,Ind) mice. Thus, although PrP(C) exerts no control on cleavage of APP(Swe) by BACE1, it has a profound influence on the cleavage of APP(WT), suggesting that PrP(C) may be a key protective player against sporadic Alzheimer disease.

Number:  194
UID:  21779381
Founded words:  ['associated']
Abstract:  Migraine is associated with an increased risk for cardiovascular disease (CVD). Both migraine and CVD are highly heritable. However, the genetic liability for CVD among migraineurs is unclear.

Number:  195
UID:  21779381
Founded words:  ['association']
Abstract:  We performed a genome-wide association study for incident CVD events during 12 years of follow-up among 5,122 migraineurs participating in the population-based Women's Genome Health Study. Migraine was self-reported and CVD events were confirmed after medical records review. We calculated odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) and considered a genome-wide p-value <5×10(-8) as significant.

Number:  196
UID:  21779381
Founded words:  ['association', 'associated', 'associated', 'associated']
Abstract:  Among the 5,122 women with migraine 164 incident CVD events occurred during follow-up. No SNP was associated with major CVD, ischemic stroke, myocardial infarction, or CVD death at the genome-wide level; however, five SNPs showed association with p<5×10(-6). Among migraineurs with aura rs7698623 in MEPE (OR = 6.37; 95% CI 3.15-12.90; p = 2.7×10(-7)) and rs4975709 in IRX4 (OR = 5.06; 95% CI 2.66-9.62; p = 7.7×10(-7)) appeared to be associated with ischemic stroke, rs2143678 located close to MDF1 with major CVD (OR = 3.05; 95% CI 1.98-4.69; p = 4.3×10(-7)), and the intergenic rs1406961 with CVD death (OR = 12.33; 95% CI 4.62-32.87; p = 5.2×10(-7)). Further, rs1047964 in BACE1 appeared to be associated with CVD death among women with any migraine (OR = 4.67; 95% CI 2.53-8.62; p = 8.0×10(-7)).

Number:  197
UID:  21779381
Founded words:  ['associations', 'association']
Abstract:  Our results provide some suggestion for an association of five SNPs with CVD events among women with migraine; none of the results was genome-wide significant. Four associations appeared among migraineurs with aura, two of those with ischemic stroke. Although our population is among the largest with migraine and incident CVD information, these results must be treated with caution, given the limited number of CVD events among women with migraine and the low minor allele frequencies for three of the SNPs. Our results await independent replication and should be considered hypothesis generating for future research.

Number:  198
UID:  21765445
Founded words:  ['activation', 'mediated']
Abstract:  RGZ protects the euroblastoma cells against AGEs-induced injury via its anti-oxidative, anti-apoptotic and anti-inflammatory properties that seems to be mediated by PPARγ activation. The results suggest a beneficial role for RGZ in the treatment of Alzheimer's disease.

Number:  199
UID:  21738672
Founded words:  ['activated', 'activated', 'activated', 'activates', 'activate', 'associated']
Abstract:  BACE1 is a key enzyme involved in the production of amyloid ß-peptide (Aß) in Alzheimer's disease (AD) brains. Normally, its expression is constitutively inhibited due to the presence of the 5'untranslated region (5'UTR) in the BACE1 promoter. BACE1 expression is activated by phosphorylation of the eukaryotic initiation factor (eIF)2-alpha, which reverses the inhibitory effect exerted by BACE1 5'UTR. There are four kinases associated with different types of stress that could phosphorylate eIF2-alpha. Here we focus on the double-stranded (ds) RNA-activated protein kinase (PKR). PKR is activated during viral infection, including that of herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV1), a virus suggested to be implicated in the development of AD, acting when present in brains of carriers of the type 4 allele of the apolipoprotein E gene. HSV1 is a dsDNA virus but it has genes on both strands of the genome, and from these genes complementary RNA molecules are transcribed. These could activate BACE1 expression by the PKR pathway. Here we demonstrate in HSV1-infected neuroblastoma cells, and in peripheral nervous tissue from HSV1-infected mice, that HSV1 activates PKR. Cloning BACE1 5'UTR upstream of a luciferase (luc) gene confirmed its inhibitory effect, which can be prevented by salubrinal, an inhibitor of the eIF2-alpha phosphatase PP1c. Treatment with the dsRNA analog poly (I∶C) mimicked the stimulatory effect exerted by salubrinal over BACE1 translation in the 5'UTR-luc construct and increased Aß production in HEK-APPsw cells. Summarizing, our data suggest that PKR activated in brain by HSV1 could play an important role in the development of AD.

Number:  200
UID:  21712774
Founded words:  ['regulated']
Abstract:  BACE gene promoter activity was inhibited by the over-expression of SUMO proteins and was blocked by disrupting the SP1 site. Endogenous BACE mRNA level was also negatively regulated by the induction of SUMO proteins. Using a specific inhitor of SP1, BACE promoter activity was coordinately inhibited.

Number:  201
UID:  21712774
Founded words:  ['regulates']
Abstract:  SUMO negatively regulates the BACE expression and SP1 is involved in the process.

Number:  202
UID:  21707077
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  Using fragment-based screening of a focused fragment library, 2-aminoquinoline 1 was identified as an initial hit for BACE1. Further SAR development was supported by X-ray structures of BACE1 cocrystallized with various ligands and molecular modeling studies to expedite the discovery of potent compounds. These strategies enabled us to integrate the C-3 side chain on 2-aminoquinoline 1 extending deep into the P2' binding pocket of BACE1 and enhancing the ligand's potency. We were able to improve the BACE1 potency to subnanomolar range, over 10(6)-fold more potent than the initial hit (900 μM). Further elaboration of the physical properties of the lead compounds to those more consistent with good blood-brain barrier permeability led to inhibitors with greatly improved cellular activity and permeability. Compound 59 showed an IC(50) value of 11 nM on BACE1 and cellular activity of 80 nM. This compound was advanced into rat pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic studies and demonstrated significant reduction of Aβ levels in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).

Number:  203
UID:  21695060
Founded words:  ['regulated']
Abstract:  Regulated intramembrane proteolysis of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) by the protease activities α-, β- and γ-secretase controls the generation of the neurotoxic amyloid β peptide. APLP2, the amyloid precursor-like protein 2, is a homolog of APP, which shows functional overlap with APP, but lacks an amyloid β domain. Compared to APP, less is known about the proteolytic processing of APLP2, in particular in neurons, and the cleavage sites have not yet been determined. APLP2 is cleaved by the β-secretase BACE1 and additionally by an α-secretase activity. The two metalloproteases ADAM10 and ADAM17 have been suggested as candidate APLP2 α-secretases in cell lines. Here, we used RNA interference and found that ADAM10, but not ADAM17, is required for the constitutive α-secretase cleavage of APLP2 in HEK293 and SH-SY5Y cells. Likewise, in primary murine neurons knock-down of ADAM10 suppressed APLP2 α-secretase cleavage. Using mass spectrometry we determined the proteolytic cleavage sites in the APLP2 sequence. ADAM10 was found to cleave APLP2 after arginine 670, whereas BACE1 cleaves after leucine 659. Both cleavage sites are located in close proximity to the membrane. γ-secretase cleavage was found to occur at different peptide bonds between alanine 694 and valine 700, which is close to the N-terminus of the predicted APLP2 transmembrane domain. Determination of the APLP2 cleavage sites enables functional studies of the different APLP2 ectodomain fragments and the production of cleavage-site specific antibodies for APLP2, which may be used for biomarker development.

Number:  204
UID:  21674237
Founded words:  ['mediated']
Abstract:  Abnormal accumulation of β-amyloid (Aβ) is the main characteristic of Alzheimer's disease (AD) brain and Aβ peptides are generated from proteolytic cleavages of amyloid precursor protein (APP) by β-site APP-converting enzyme 1 (BACE1) and presenilin 1 (PS1). Sphingosylphosphorylcholine (SPC), a choline-containing sphingolipid, showed suppressive effect on Aβ production in PC12 cells which stably express Swedish mutant of amyloid precursor protein (APPsw). SPC (> 3 μM) significantly lowered the accumulation of Aβ40/42 and the expression of BACE1. However, the transcriptions of other APP processing enzymes like ADAM10 and PS1 were not affected by the SPC addition. Meanwhile, phosphocholine (PC) or other lysophospholipids, such as lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC), lysophosphatidic acid (LPA), sphingosyl-1-phosphate (S1P), did not alter BACE1 expression. Down-regulatory effect of SPC on BACE1 expression appeared to be mediated by NF-κB which is known to suppress the trans-activation of BACE1 promoter in PC12 cells. Here, the nuclear tanslocation of NF-κB was enhanced by SPC treatment in immune-fluorescent image analysis and NF-κB reporter assay. Furthermore, the catalytic activities of BACE1 and BACE2 were dose-dependently inhibited by SPC displaying IC₅₀ values of 2.79 μM and 12.05 μM, respectively. Overall, these data suggest that SPC has the potential to ameliorate Aβ pathology in neurons by down-regulating the BACE1-mediated amyloidogenic pathway.

Number:  205
UID:  21670066
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interacting', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interacting', 'mediates', 'regulate', 'regulates']
Abstract:  Excessive production or accumulation of β-amyloid (Aβ) peptides in human brains leads to increased amyloid deposition and cognitive dysfunction, which are invariable pathological features in patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD). Many cellular factors can regulate the production of Aβ. In this study, we show that a family of proteins named Nogo receptor proteins (NgR1 to NgR3) regulates Aβ production via interaction with amyloid precursor protein (APP). Further mapping of the interacting domain indicates that a small region adjacent to the BACE1 cleavage site of APP mediates interaction of APP with Nogo receptor proteins. Our results also indicate that increased interaction between Nogo receptor and APP reduces surface expression of APP and favors processing of APP by BACE1. When NgR2 was ablated in AD transgenic mice expressing Swedish APP and PS1ΔE9, amyloid deposition was clearly reduced (0.66% of total measured area in APP(swe)/PS1ΔE9/NgR2(-/-) mice vs. 0.76% of total measured area in APP(swe)/PS1ΔE9 mice). Our results demonstrate that down-regulation of NgR expression is a potential approach for inhibiting amyloid deposition in AD patients.

Number:  206
UID:  21666671
Founded words:  ['activation', 'regulating', 'regulator', 'regulating']
Abstract:  Tumor necrosis factor-α-converting enzyme (TACE; also known as ADAM17) is a proteolytic sheddase that is responsible for the cleavage of several membrane-bound molecules. We report that TACE cleaves neuregulin-1 (NRG1) type III in the epidermal growth factor domain, probably inactivating it (as assessed by deficient activation of the phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase pathway), and thereby negatively regulating peripheral nervous system (PNS) myelination. Lentivirus-mediated knockdown of TACE in vitro in dorsal root ganglia neurons accelerates the onset of myelination and results in hypermyelination. In agreement, motor neurons of conditional knockout mice lacking TACE specifically in these cells are significantly hypermyelinated, and small-caliber fibers are aberrantly myelinated. Further, reduced TACE activity rescues hypomyelination in NRG1 type III haploinsufficient mice in vivo. We also show that the inhibitory effect of TACE is neuron-autonomous, as Schwann cells lacking TACE elaborate myelin of normal thickness. Thus, TACE is a modulator of NRG1 type III activity and is a negative regulator of myelination in the PNS.

Number:  207
UID:  21630010
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activation', 'activator', 'associated']
Abstract:  The synthetic Liver X receptor (LXR) activator T0901317 has been reported to exert neuroprotective effect in Alzheimer's disease, but the relationship between LXR activation and beta-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE-1) remains uncertain. This study investigated the effect of T0901317 on membrane cholesterol levels, BACE1 expression and activity. We found that T0901317 decreased membrane cholesterol levels, reduced BACE1 expression and activity as well as β-secretase cleaved C-terminal fragment (β-CTF) levels in vivo and in vitro. Meanwhile, the expression of ATP-binding membrane cassette transport protein A1 (ABCA1) enhanced. Additionally, inhibition of ABCA1 abrogated the effects of T0901317 on membrane cholesterol levels and β-secretase activity. Moreover, addition of LXR antagonist reversed the effect of T0901317 on ABCA1 mRNA expression, membrane cholesterol levels and β-secretase activity. Our results suggest that activation of LXR may decrease BACE1 expression and activity through a pathway associated with ABCA1-mediated reduction in membrane cholesterol levels.

Number:  208
UID:  21613623
Founded words:  ['associated', 'associated', 'bind', 'binds', 'bind']
Abstract:  Monoclonal antibodies have therapeutic potential for treating diseases of the central nervous system, but their accumulation in the brain is limited by the blood-brain barrier (BBB). Here, we show that reducing the affinity of an antibody for the transferrin receptor (TfR) enhances receptor-mediated transcytosis of the anti-TfR antibody across the BBB into the mouse brain where it reaches therapeutically relevant concentrations. Anti-TfR antibodies that bind with high affinity to TfR remain associated with the BBB, whereas lower-affinity anti-TfR antibody variants are released from the BBB into the brain and show a broad distribution 24 hours after dosing. We designed a bispecific antibody that binds with low affinity to TfR and with high affinity to the enzyme β-secretase (BACE1), which processes amyloid precursor protein into amyloid-β (Aβ) peptides including those associated with Alzheimer's disease. Compared to monospecific anti-BACE1 antibody, the bispecific antibody accumulated in the mouse brain and led to a greater reduction in brain Aβ after a single systemic dose. TfR-facilitated transcytosis of this bispecific antibody across the BBB may enhance its potency as an anti-BACE1 therapy for treating Alzheimer's disease.

Number:  209
UID:  21613622
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binds', 'binding']
Abstract:  Reducing production of amyloid-β (Aβ) peptide by direct inhibition of the enzymes that process amyloid precursor protein (APP) is a central therapeutic strategy for treating Alzheimer's disease. However, small-molecule inhibitors of the β-secretase (BACE1) and γ-secretase APP processing enzymes have shown a lack of target selectivity and poor penetrance of the blood-brain barrier (BBB). Here, we have developed a high-affinity, phage-derived human antibody that targets BACE1 (anti-BACE1) and is anti-amyloidogenic. Anti-BACE1 reduces endogenous BACE1 activity and Aβ production in human cell lines expressing APP and in cultured primary neurons. Anti-BACE1 is highly selective and does not inhibit the related enzymes BACE2 or cathepsin D. Competitive binding assays and x-ray crystallography indicate that anti-BACE1 binds noncompetitively to an exosite on BACE1 and not to the catalytic site. Systemic dosing of mice and nonhuman primates with anti-BACE1 resulted in sustained reductions in peripheral Aβ peptide concentrations. Anti-BACE1 also reduces central nervous system Aβ concentrations in mouse and monkey, consistent with a measurable uptake of antibody across the BBB. Thus, BACE1 can be targeted in a highly selective manner through passive immunization with anti-BACE1, providing a potential approach for treating Alzheimer's disease. Nevertheless, therapeutic success with anti-BACE1 will depend on improving antibody uptake into the brain.

Number:  210
UID:  21612159
Founded words:  ['function', 'function']
Abstract:  All serotonin derivatives described here (1-9) inhibited BACE 1 in a dose dependent manner. The 50% Inhibition Concentration (IC50) of N-cinnamoyl serotonin (1) was 86.7 +/- 4.0 microM. The peptide conjugation of serotonin derivatives influenced the BACE 1 inhibitory activity. Among serotonin derivatives (1-8), introduction of substituents, such as hydroxyl and methoxy groups at the 4'-position decreased the inhibitory activity (N-p-coumaroyl serotonin (2), N-p-methoxy cinnamoyl serotonin (3)). With a hydroxylgroup at the 4'-position, and the meta-hydroxy function being substituted by a hydroxyl group or methoxy group (N-caffeoyl serotonin (4), N-feruloyl serotonin (5)), inhibitory activity was weakened, (IC50 >400 microM). BACE 1 inhibitory activity was effected by the substituents of the cinnamic acid moiety. This is the first report on Structure-Activity-Relationships (SAR) for the BACE 1-inhibiting activity of serotonin derivatives. These serotonin derivatives, which have anti-oxidative effects as well are expected to be useful in the study of the mechanisms of Alzheimer's disease.

Number:  211
UID:  21576249
Founded words:  ['activate', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'regulating', 'regulating']
Abstract:  Neuregulin-1 (Nrg1) is encoded by a single gene and exists in naturally secreted and transmembrane isoforms. Nrg1 exerts its signaling activity through interaction with its cognate ErbB receptors. Multiple membrane-anchored Nrg1 isoforms, present in six different membrane topologies, must be processed by a protease to initiate a signaling cascade. Here, we demonstrate that BACE1 and ADAM10 can process type I and III Nrg1 at two adjacent sites. Our cleavage site mapping experiments showed that the BACE1 cleavage site is located eight amino acids downstream of the ADAM10 cleavage site, and this order of cleavage is the opposite of amyloid precursor protein cleavage by these two enzymes. Cleavages were further confirmed via optimized electrophoresis. Cleavage of type I or III Nrg1 by ADAM10 and BACE1 released a signaling-capable N-terminal fragment (ntf), either Nrg1-ntfα or Nrg1-ntfβ, which could similarly activate an ErbB receptor as evidenced by increased phosphorylation of Akt and ERK, two downstream signaling molecules. Although both Nrg1-ntfα and Nrg1-ntfβ could initiate a common signaling cascade, inhibition or down-regulation of ADAM10 alone in a co-culture system did not affect normal myelination, whereas specific inhibition of BACE1 impaired normal myelination. Thus, processing of Nrg1 by BACE1 appears to be more critical for regulating myelination. Our results imply that a significant inhibition of BACE1 could potentially impair Nrg1 signaling activity in vivo.

Number:  212
UID:  21565331
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'regulator', 'regulate', 'regulated']
Abstract:  Recently, BACE1 expression was shown to be regulated by microRNAs, small endogenous RNA molecules that regulate protein expression through sequence-specific interaction with messenger RNA. Here, we showed that microRNA-29c (miR-29c), a miRNA that is enriched in the brain and highly expressed in the APPswe/PSΔE9 mouse lowers BACE1 protein in vitro and in transgenic miR-29c mice. In silico analysis identified two putative target sites in the BACE1 mRNA for the miR-29c family. We chose SH-SY5Y, HEK-293T cell lines and miR-29c transgenic mice for these studies to validate our hypothesis. Significantly, over-expression of miR-29c in SH-SY5Y, HEK-293T cell lines and miR-29c transgenic mice downregulated BACE1 protein levels. Our findings suggest that miR-29c may be an endogenous regulator of BACE1 protein expression.

Number:  213
UID:  21557719
Founded words:  ['associated', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulate']
Abstract:  Amyloid beta (Aβ) peptides are related to the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). The search for therapeutic strategies that lower these peptides has mainly focused on the proteolytic processing of the β-amyloid precursor protein (APP), and other post-transcriptional pathways. The transcription factor specificity protein 1 (Sp1) is vital for the regulation of several genes involved in AD including APP and the beta site APP cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1). We have previously reported that tolfenamic acid promotes the degradation of Sp1 protein (SP1) in pancreatic human cancer cells and mice tumors. This study examines the ability of tolfenamic acid to reduce SP1 levels, and thereby decrease APP transcription and Aβ levels in rodent brains. Tolfenamic acid was administered by oral gavage to C57BL/6 mice at variable dosages and for different time periods. Results have shown that tolfenamic acid was able to down regulate brain protein levels of SP1, APP, and Aβ. These findings demonstrate that interference with upstream transcriptional pathways can lower pathogenic intermediates associated with AD, and thus tolfenamic acid represents a novel approach for the development of a therapeutic intervention for AD.

Number:  214
UID:  21519046
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activation', 'activation']
Abstract:  β-Amyloid protein (Aβ) accumulation, caspase activation, apoptosis, and hypoxia-induced neurotoxicity have been suggested to be involved in Alzheimer disease neuropathogenesis. Aβ is produced from amyloid precursor protein through proteolytic processing by the aspartyl protease β-site amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzyme (BACE) and γ-secretase. Inhaled anesthetics have long been considered to protect against neurotoxicity. However, recent studies have suggested that the inhaled anesthetic isoflurane may promote neurotoxicity by inducing caspase activation and apoptosis, and by increasing levels of BACE and Aβ. We therefore sought to determine whether isoflurane can induce concentration-dependent dual effects on hypoxia-induced caspase-3 activation and increases in BACE levels: protection versus promotion.

Number:  215
UID:  21519046
Founded words:  ['activation']
Abstract:  We show for the first time that treatment with 0.5% isoflurane for 8 hours attenuated, whereas treatment with 2% isoflurane for 8 hours enhanced, hypoxia-induced caspase-3 activation and increases in BACE levels. The 2% isoflurane treatment also enhanced a hypoxia-induced decrease in Bcl-2 levels.

Number:  216
UID:  21500352
Founded words:  ['association']
Abstract:  BACE1 cleaves the amyloid precursor protein (APP) at the β-cleavage site (Met(671) -Asp(672) ) to initiate the generation of amyloid peptide Aβ. BACE1 is also known to cleave APP at a much less well-characterized β'-cleavage site (Tyr(681) -Glu(682) ). We describe here the identification of a novel APP mutation E682K located at this β'-site in an early onset Alzheimer's disease (AD) case. Functional analysis revealed that this E682K mutation blocked the β'-site and shifted cleavage of APP to the β-site, causing increased Aβ production. This work demonstrates the functional importance of APP processing at the β'-site and shows how disruption of the balance between β- and β'-site cleavage may enhance the amyloidogenic processing and consequentially risk for AD. Increasing exon- and exome-based sequencing efforts will identify many more putative pathogenic mutations without conclusive segregation-based evidence in a single family. Our study shows how functional analysis of such mutations allows to determine the potential pathogenic nature of these mutations. We propose to classify the E682K mutation as probable pathogenic awaiting further independent confirmation of its association with AD in other patients.

Number:  217
UID:  21413990
Founded words:  ['regulated', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Regulated intramembrane proteolysis (RIP) controls the communication between cells and the extracellular environment. RIP is essential in the nervous system, but also in other tissues. In the RIP process, a membrane protein typically undergoes two consecutive cleavages. The first one results in the shedding of its ectodomain. The second one occurs within its transmembrane domain, resulting in secretion of a small peptide and the release of the intracellular domain into the cytosol. The proteolytic cleavage fragments act as versatile signaling molecules or are further degraded. An increasing number of membrane proteins undergo RIP. These include growth factors, cytokines, cell adhesion proteins, receptors, viral proteins and signal peptides. A dysregulation of RIP is found in diseases, such as leukemia and Alzheimer's disease. One of the first RIP substrates discovered was the amyloid precursor protein (APP). RIP processing of APP controls the generation of the amyloid β-peptide, which is believed to cause Alzheimer's disease. Focusing on APP as the best-studied RIP substrate, this review describes the function and mechanism of the APP RIP proteases with the goal to elucidate cellular mechanisms and common principles of the RIP process in general.

Number:  218
UID:  21342558
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interactions']
Abstract:  Among ten generated pharmacophore hypotheses, Hypo 1 was chosen as best pharmacophore hypothesis. Hypo 1 consists of one hydrogen bond donor, one positive ionizable, one ring aromatic and two hydrophobic features with high correlation coefficient of 0.977, highest cost difference of 121.98 bits and lowest RMSD value of 0.804. Hypo 1 was validated using Fischer randomization method, test set with a correlation coefficient of 0.917, leave-one-out method and decoy set with a goodness of hit score of 0.76. The validated Hypo 1 was used as a 3D query in database screening and retrieved 773 compounds with the estimated activity value <100 nM. These hits were docked into the active site of BACE-1 and further refined based on molecular interactions with the essential amino acids and good GOLD fitness score.

Number:  219
UID:  21354237
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  BACE1 is a key protease involved in the proteolysis of amyloid precursor protein (APP) that generates a toxic peptide amyloid beta (Aβ), a pathological feature of Alzheimer's disease (AD). The enzyme is believed to possess an open and a closed conformation that corresponds to its free and inhibitor-bound form respectively. Here, we study the dynamic transition of BACE1 employing normal mode analysis (NMA) using a simplified elastic network model (ENM). Estimation of the catalytic cavity volume on the structures of BACE1 encoded by the lowest frequency normal mode reveals the dynamical transition of the enzyme from the open to the closed conformer. Detailed analysis reveals that concerted movement of different loop segments in the active site of the protein, namely flap regions, 10s loop, A loop and F loop, squeeze the catalytic cavity between the N-terminal and C-terminal lobe of the substrate binding domain of BACE1. We also propose that the NMA encoded multiple receptor conformations (MRC) of BACE1 elucidate the pharmacophoric feature necessary to inhibit the enzyme by a polyphenol, myricetin. van der Waals interaction is found to be the main driving force that guides the ligand induced conformational switching to the closed conformer. We suggest that NMA derived MRC of BACE1 is an efficient way to treat the receptor flexibility in docking and thus can be further applied in virtual screening and structure based drug design.

Number:  220
UID:  21336821
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activation', 'regulating', 'regulating']
Abstract:  Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder that affects the elderly population. Deposition of beta-amyloid (Aβ) in the brain is a hallmark of AD pathology. In our previous study, we have constructed a cell line expressing human APP695 (hAPP695) in SH-EP1 cells stably transfected with human nicotinic receptor (nAChR) α4 subunit and β2 subunit gene. In present study, we found that activation of α4β2 nAChR by nicotine and epibatidine decreased secreted Aβ level in the cell line and hippocampal neurons, but had no effects on full-length APP695 and sAPP-α. Nicotine also decreases BACE1 and PSEN1 expression, as well as ERK1 and NFκB P65 subunit expression in the cell line. Furthermore, BACE1 promoter activity is, but PSEN1 not, decreased by nicotine in the cell line. All the results suggest that activation of α4β2 nAChR decreases Aβ through regulating BACE1 transcription by ERK1-NFκB pathway. Additionally, analysis of BACE1 promoter activity by dual-luciferase reporter assay may be useful for drug screening as a high throughput method.

Number:  221
UID:  21307265
Founded words:  ['activated', 'mediate', 'mediate', 'regulating', 'regulating', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Accumulation of toxic amyloid-β (Aβ) in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus is a major pathological feature of Alzheimer's disease (AD). The neurotrophin receptor p75NTR has been proposed to mediate Aβ-induced neurotoxicity; however, its role in the development of AD remains to be clarified. The p75NTR/ExonIII-/- mice and APPSwe/PS1dE9 mice were crossed to generate transgenic AD mice with deletion of p75NTR gene. In APPSwe/PS1dE9 transgenic mice, p75NTR expression was localized in the basal forebrain neurons and degenerative neurites in neocortex, increased with aging, and further activated by Aβ accumulation. Deletion of the p75NTR gene in APPSwe/PS1dE9 mice reduced soluble Aβ levels in the brain and serum, but increased the accumulation of insoluble Aβ and Aβ plaque formation. There was no change in the levels of amyloid precursor protein (APP) and its proteolytic derivatives, or α-, β-, and γ-secretase activities, or in levels of BACE1, neprilysin (NEP), and insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE) proteins. Aβ production by cortical neurons of APPSwe/PS1dE9 mice was reduced by deletion of p75NTR gene in vitro. Recombinant extracellular domain of p75NTR attenuated the oligomerization and fibrillation of synthetic Aβ(42) peptide in vitro, and reduced local Aβ plaques after hippocampus injection in vivo. In addition, deletion of p75NTR attenuated microgliosis but increased the microhemorrhage profiles in the brain. The deletion of p75NTR did not significantly change the cognitive function of the mice up to the age of 9 months. Our data suggest that p75NTR plays a critical role in regulating Aβ levels by both increasing Aβ production and attenuating its aggregation, and they caution that a therapeutic intervention simply reducing p75NTR may exacerbate AD pathology.

Number:  222
UID:  21258151
Founded words:  ['associated', 'mediated', 'complexes']
Abstract:  Astrocytes in amyloid-β (Aβ)₄₂-accumulating human brains afflicted with Alzheimer's disease (AD) upregulate vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-A synthesis and also become loaded with Aβ₄₂. We have already shown that Aβ(25-35) (surrogate of Aβ₄₂)-induced VEGF-A production in 'normoxic' cultures of early passage normal human cerebral astrocytes (NAHAs) is mediated by the stabilization of VEGF gene-stimulating hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1α and nuclear translocation of HIF-1α•HIF-1β complexes. We have now found that treating these NAHAs with Aβ(25-35) also stimulates them to make Aβ₄₂ (appearing in immunoblots as several bands with M(r)'s from 8 kDa upwards), whose levels peak at 48 h (2.8-fold versus 0 h, p < 0.001) and then start falling slowly. This rise of Aβ₄₂ peptide production coincides with a transiently increased flow of HIF-1α (therefore HIF-1α•HIF-1β complexes; at 24 h, 1.5-fold versus 0 h, p < 0.001) into the nucleus and transient surges first of β-secretase (BACE-1/β-S) mRNA expression (1.2-fold versus 0 h, p = 0.013) and activity peaking at 24-h (1.4-fold versus 0 h, p = 0.001), and then of γ-secretase (γ-S) activity cresting at 48 h (1.6-fold versus 0 h, p < 0.001) that cleave the Aβ₄₂ peptides from amyloid-β protein precursor. Since the genes encoding components of these two secretases have the same HIF-1α•HIF-1β-responsive elements in their promoters as the VEGF gene, these observations suggest that the Aβ₄₂ released from neurons in the AD brain can recruit associated astrocytes via HIF-1α•HIF-1β signaling into the pool of Aβ₄₂-producing cells. In other words, Aβ₄₂ begets Aβ₄₂ in NAHAs.

Number:  223
UID:  21257714
Founded words:  ['mediated']
Abstract:  Amyloid peptide (Aβ) is generated by sequential cleavage of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) by β-secretase (Bace1) and γ-secretase. Aβ production increases after plasma membrane cholesterol loading through unknown mechanisms. To determine how APP-Bace1 proximity affects this phenomenon, we developed a fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy-Förster resonance energy transfer (FLIM-FRET) technique for visualization of these molecules either by epifluorescence or at the plasma membrane only using total internal reflection fluorescence. Further, we used fluorescence correlation spectroscopy to determine the lipid rafts partition of APP-yellow fluorescent protein (YFP) and Bace1-green fluorescent protein (GFP) molecules at the plasma membrane of neurons. We show that less than 10 min after cholesterol exposure, Bace1-GFP/APP-mCherry proximity increases selectively at the membrane and APP relocalizes to raft domains, preceded by rapid endocytosis. After longer cholesterol exposures, APP and Bace1 are found in proximity intracellularly. We demonstrate that cholesterol loading does not increase Aβ production by having a direct impact on Bace1 catalytic activity but rather by altering the accessibility of Bace1 to its substrate, APP. This change in accessibility is mediated by clustering in lipid rafts, followed by rapid endocytosis.

Number:  224
UID:  21166521
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  We originally reported the use of vitamin E (α-tocopherol) as an in vivo vector of short-interfering RNA (siRNA) to the liver. Here, we apply our strategy to the brain. By combining high-density lipoprotein (HDL) as a second carrier with α-tocopherol-conjugated siRNA (Toc-siRNA) in the brain, we achieved dramatic improvement of siRNA delivery to neurons. After direct intracerebroventricular (ICV) infusion of Toc-siRNA/HDL for 7 days, extensive and specific knock-down of a target gene, β-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1), was observed in both mRNA and protein levels, especially in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus. This new delivery method achieved a much more prominent down-regulation effect than conventional silencing methods of the brain gene, i.e., ICV infusion of nonconjugated siRNA or oligonucleotides. With only 3 nmol Toc-siRNA with HDL, BACE1 mRNA in the parietal cortex could be reduced by ∼ 70%. We suppose that this dramatic improvement of siRNA delivery to the brain is due to the use of lipoprotein receptor-mediated endocytosis because the silencing efficiency was significantly increased by binding of Toc-siRNA to the lipoprotein, and in contrast, was clearly decreased in lipoprotein-receptor knockout mice. These results suggest exogenous siRNA could be used clinically for otherwise incurable neurological diseases.

Number:  225
UID:  21073877
Founded words:  ['binding', 'bind', 'binds', 'binding', 'bind', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  The Amyloid-β (Aβ) peptide is produced from the amyloid precursor protein (APP) by sequential proteolytic cleavage of APP first by β-secretase and then by γ-secretase. β-Site APP cleaving enzyme-1 (BACE-1) is the predominant enzyme involved in β-secretase processing of APP and is a primary therapeutic target for treatment of Alzheimer's disease. While inhibiting BACE-1 activity has obvious therapeutic advantages, BACE-1 also cleaves numerous other substrates with important physiological activity. Thus, blanket inhibition of BACE-1 function may have adverse side effects. We isolated a single chain variable fragment (scFv) from a human-based scFv yeast display library that selectively inhibits BACE-1 activity toward APP by binding the APP substrate at the proteolytic site. We selected the iBSEC1 scFv, since it recognizes the BACE-1 cleavage site on APP but does not bind the adjacent highly antigenic N-terminal of Aβ, and thus it will target APP but not soluble Aβ. When added to 7PA2 cells, a mammalian cell line that overexpresses APP, the iBSEC1 scFv binds APP on the cell surface, reduces toxicity induced by APP overexpression, and reduces both intracellular and extracellular Aβ levels by around 50%. Since the iBSEC1 scFv does not contain the antibody F(c) region, this construct does not pose the risk of exacerbating inflammation in the brain as faced with full-length monoclonal antibodies for potential therapeutic applications.

Number:  226
UID:  21072203
Founded words:  ['functions', 'function', 'function', 'functions']
Abstract:  Lactic acid, a natural by-product of glycolysis, is produced at excess levels in response to impaired mitochondrial function, high-energy demand, and low oxygen availability. The enzyme involved in the production of β-amyloid peptide (Aβ) of Alzheimer's disease, BACE1, functions optimally at lower pH, which led us to investigate a potential role of lactic acid in the processing of amyloid precursor protein (APP).

Number:  227
UID:  21072203
Founded words:  ['interact', 'interact']
Abstract:  Lactic acid increased levels of Aβ40 and 42, as measured by ELISA, in culture medium of human neuroblastoma cells (SH-SY5Y), whereas it decreased APP metabolites, such as sAPPα. In cell lysates, APP levels were increased and APP was found to interact with ER-chaperones in a perinuclear region, as determined by co-immunoprecipitation and fluorescence microscopy studies. Lactic acid had only a very modest effect on cellular pH, did increase the levels of ER chaperones Grp78 and Grp94 and led to APP aggregate formation reminiscent of aggresomes.

Number:  228
UID:  21072203
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction']
Abstract:  These findings suggest that sustained elevations in lactic acid levels could be a risk factor in amyloidogenesis related to Alzheimer's disease through enhanced APP interaction with ER chaperone proteins and aberrant APP processing leading to increased generation of amyloid peptides and APP aggregates.

Number:  229
UID:  20943756
Founded words:  ['function', 'function', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  BACE1 (β-site amyloidogenic cleavage of precursor protein-cleaving enzyme 1) is a β-secretase protein that plays a central role in the production of the β-amyloid peptide in the brain and is thought to be involved in the Alzheimer's pathogenesis. In type 2 diabetes, amyloid deposition within the pancreatic islets is a pathophysiological hallmark, making crucial the study in the pancreas of BACE1 and its homologous BACE2 to understand the pathological mechanisms of this disease. The objectives of the present study were to characterize the localization of BACE proteins in human pancreas and determine their function. High levels of BACE enzymatic activity were detected in human pancreas. In normal human pancreas, BACE1 was observed in endocrine as well as in exocrine pancreas, whereas BACE2 expression was restricted to β-cells. Intracellular analysis using immunofluorescence showed colocalization of BACE1 with insulin and BACE2 with clathrin-coated vesicles of the plasma membrane in MIN6 cells. When BACE1 and -2 were pharmacologically inhibited, BACE1 localization was not altered, whereas BACE2 content in clathrin-coated vesicles was increased. Insulin internalization rate was reduced, insulin receptor β-subunit (IRβ) expression was decreased at the plasma membrane and increased in the Golgi apparatus, and a significant reduction in insulin gene expression was detected. Similar results were obtained after specific BACE2 silencing in MIN6 cells. All these data point to a role for BACE2 in the IRβ trafficking and insulin signaling. In conclusion, BACE2 is hereby presented as an important enzyme in β-cell function.

Number:  230
UID:  20930275
Founded words:  ['association']
Abstract:  We previously reported age- and Alzheimer's disease (AD)-related increases in the activities of β-secretase (BACE-1) and Aβ-degrading enzymes including neprilysin (NEP) and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) in the frontal cortex. We suggested that these increases were secondary to the accumulation of insoluble amyloid-β (Aβ) and a decline in soluble Aβ. We have further tested this hypothesis by examination of frontal cortex obtained postmortem from individuals with Down's syndrome (DS), in whom AD-like neuropathological changes occur in association with early-onset dementia. We measured total soluble and insoluble (guanidine-extractable) Aβ, BACE-1 activity, and the concentrations and activities of NEP and ACE in two independent DS cohorts: an initial, Bristol cohort (9 DS cases, 8 controls matched for age-at-death) and a validation Newcastle cohort (20 DS, 18 controls with a wider spectrum of age-at-death). In both cohorts the level of insoluble (but not soluble) Aβ was significantly higher in DS than controls and was comparable to previously measured levels in AD. NEP protein concentration and activity were significantly increased in DS; a trend towards increased BACE-1 activity was observed in DS but did not reach statistical significance. Both NEP and BACE-1 correlated with the level of insoluble Aβ. The concentration of ACE in DS was elevated in the pilot cohort only and ACE activity was unchanged. These findings provide strong support that BACE-1 and NEP activities, but not ACE, increase in response to the accumulation of insoluble Aβ within the brain.

Number:  231
UID:  20926259
Founded words:  ['activation', 'associated', 'regulate']
Abstract:  Neuregulin 1 (NRG1) is a susceptibility gene for schizophrenia. A decrease in NRG1-ErbB4 signalling has also been associated with the disease. β-amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzyme (BACE1) processes type III NRG1 precursor, a major neuregulin variant expressed in the brain, to release NRG1 fragments that trigger signalling events and activation of neurotransmitter receptors. Experimental evidence suggests that muscarinic acetylcholine receptors (CHRM) regulate BACE1 expression. Having recently shown that CHRM1 levels are decreased selectively in frontal cortex regions of a subpopulation of schizophrenic patients (muscarinic receptor deficit schizophrenia, MRDS) we aimed to compare the protein expression of BACE1 and NRG1 in the agranular frontal cortex Brodmann's area 6 of SCZ subjects with normal levels of CHRM1 (N = 19), MRDS (N = 20), and age/gender-matched non-psychiatric (healthy) controls (HC; N = 20). Western blot analysis of post-mortem samples showed that the levels of BACE1 and full-length NRG1 precursor (130 kDa) did not differ significantly between the three groups. In contrast, the levels of the NRG1 C-terminal fragment (NRG1-CTF) were decreased by approximately 50% in both schizophrenic groups compared to the HC group (p<0.0027). The ratio of NRG1-CTF versus NRG1 precursor was significantly reduced in the SCZ groups compared to the HC group (p = 0.051). There was no correlation between the levels of either full-length NRG1, NRG1-CTF, or BACE1 and the final recorded doses of antipsychotic drugs for the subjects with schizophrenia. A positive correlation was found between BACE1 and full-length NRG1 precursor in the HC group (r(2) = 0.671, p<0.001) but not in the schizophrenic groups. These data suggest that the proteolytic processing of NRG1 is impaired in schizophrenia.

Number:  232
UID:  20880704
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  The identification of small molecule aminohydantoins as potent and selective human β-secretase inhibitors is reported. These analogs exhibit good brain permeability (40-70%), low nanomolar potency for BACE1, and demonstrate >100-fold selectivity for the structurally related aspartyl proteases cathepsin D, renin and pepsin. Alkyl and alkoxy groups at the meta-position of the P1 phenyl, which extend toward the S3 region of the enzyme, have contributed to the ligand's reduced affinity for the efflux transporter protein P-gp, and decreased topological polar surface area, thus resulting in enhanced brain permeability. A fluorine substitution at the para-position of the P1 phenyl has contributed to 100-fold decrease of CYP3A4 inhibition and enhancement of compound metabolic stability. The plasma and brain protein binding properties of these new analogs are affected by substitutions at the P1 phenyl moiety. Higher compound protein binding was observed in the brain than in the plasma. Two structurally diverse potent BACE1 inhibitors (84 and 89) reduced 30% plasma Aβ40 in the Tg2576 mice in vivo model at 30 mg/kg p.o..

Number:  233
UID:  20853423
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  Memapsin 2 (BACE1, β-secretase), a membrane aspartic protease, functions in the cleavage of brain β-amyloid precursor protein (APP) leading to the production of β-amyloid. Because the excess level of β-amyloid in the brain is a leading factor in Alzheimer's disease (AD), memapsin 2 is a major therapeutic target for inhibitor drugs. The substrate-binding cleft of memapsin 2 accommodates 12 subsite residues, from P(8) to P(4)'. We have determined the hydrolytic preference as relative k(cat)/K(M) (preference constant) in all 12 subsites and used these data to establish a predictive algorithm for substrate hydrolytic efficiency. Using the sequences from 12 reported memapsin 2 protein substrates, the predicted and experimentally determined preference constants have an excellent correlation coefficient of 0.97. The predictive model indicates that the hydrolytic preference of memapsin 2 is determined mainly by the interaction with six subsites (from P(4) to P(2)'), a conclusion supported by the crystal structure B-factors calculated for the various residues of transition-state analogs bound to different memapsin 2 subsites. The algorithm also predicted that the replacement of the P(3), P(2), and P(1) subsites of APP from Val, Lys, and Met, respectively, to Ile, Asp, and Phe, respectively, (APP(IDF)) would result in a highest hydrolytic rate for β-amyloid-generating APP variants. Because more β-amyloid was produced from cells expressing APP(IDF) than those expressing APP with Swedish mutations, this designed APP variant may be useful in new memapsin 2 substrates or transgenic mice for AD studies.

Number:  234
UID:  20826464
Founded words:  ['regulation', 'regulation', 'regulates', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  The transient or permanent modification of nascent proteins in the early secretory pathway is an essential cellular function that ensures correct folding and maturation of membrane and secreted proteins. We have recently described a new form of post-translational regulation of the membrane protein β-site APP cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) involving transient lysine acetylation in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The essential components of this process are two ER-based acetyl-CoA:lysine acetyltransferases, ATase1 and ATase2, and a membrane transporter that translocates acetyl-CoA into the lumen of the ER. Here, we report the functional identification of acetyl-CoA transporter 1 (AT-1) as the ER membrane acetyl-CoA transporter. We show that AT-1 regulates the acetylation status of ER-transiting proteins, including the membrane proteins BACE1, low-density lipoprotein receptor and amyloid precursor protein (APP). Finally, we show that AT-1 is essential for cell viability as its downregulation results in widespread cell death and induction of features characteristic of autophagy.

Number:  235
UID:  20819221
Founded words:  ['associated', 'associated']
Abstract:  Muscle disease associated with different etiologies has been shown to produce localized accumulations of amyloid and oxidative stress-related proteins that are more commonly associated with neurodegeneration in the brain. In this study we examined changes in muscle tissue in a classic model of diabetes and hyperglycemia in rabbits to determine if similar dysregulation of Alzheimer Aβ peptides, the prion protein (PrP), and superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1), as well as nitric oxide synthases is produced in muscle in diabetic animals. This wild-type rabbit model includes systemic physiological expression of human-like Alzheimer precursor proteins and Aβ peptides that are considered key in Alzheimer protein studies.

Number:  236
UID:  20806954
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interactions', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'complex', 'complex', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  We report a molecular modeling study aimed to locate and provide the full structural characteristics of the exosite binding site of the BACE1. A three-step procedure was followed. In the first stage, we performed blind docking studies on the whole target surface. In a second stage, the mode of binding was further refined by molecular dynamics (MD) simulation. Finally, binding free energy calculations, through the MM-PBSA protocol, were carried out to gain insight into the stability and thermodynamics of the inhibitor located at the selected binding pockets. Twelve binding pockets were identified on the surface of BACE1 by blind docking studies. The calculations of binding free energies for the 12 complexes show that van der Waals interactions dominate the mode of binding of these complexes. The best ranked complex shows that residues Glu255-Pro258, Phe261, Gly264-Ala272, Asp311-Ala313, Ser315, and Asp317-Tyr320 are located within 6 Å from the INH located at the exosite. The hydrogen bonds formed between the INH peptide, residues Tyr1, Tyr3, and Leu7 with the BACE1 residues Leu267, Cys269, Trp270, Asp311, and Asp 317 can strengthen the binding of the BACE1−INH complex.

Number:  237
UID:  20795944
Founded words:  ['mediates']
Abstract:  The Abeta (amyloid-beta) peptide is derived from the sequential cleavage of AbetaPP (amyloid-beta precursor protein) by two enzymes, the β- and γ-secretases. The major β-secretase, identified as the novel transmembrane aspartic protease BACE1 (beta site APP-cleaving enzyme 1), mediates the primary amyloidogenic cleavage of AbetaPP and initiates the production of Abeta. It has been implicated in the proteolytic processing of another substrate, namely ST6Gal1 (β galactoside α2,6-sialyltransferase 1), which is the major α2,6-sialyltransferase responsible for the broad synthesis of glycoproteins and glycolipids. The present study investigated the effect of overexpression of AbetaPP on expression and secretion of ST6Gal1 in skeletal muscle cells by inducing overexpression of wild-type full-length 751-AbetaPP in the mouse myogenic cell line C2C12. Expression and secretion of the ST6Gal1 enzyme were analysed by Western blot and/or immunofluorescence staining. The results of our study demonstrated that AbetaPP overexpression in C2C12 cells increased the expression and the secretion of ST6Gal1 enzyme in vitro.

Number:  238
UID:  20702627
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  The mechanism by which papillomaviruses breach cellular membranes to deliver their genomic cargo to the nucleus is poorly understood. Here, we show that infection by a broad range of papillomavirus types requires the intramembrane protease γ secretase. The γ-secretase inhibitor (S,S)-2-[2-(3,5-difluorophenyl)-acetylamino]-N-(1-methyl-2-oxo-5-phenyl-2,3-dihydro-1H-benzo[e][1,4]diazepin-3-yl)-propionamide (compound XXI) inhibits infection in vitro by all types of papillomavirus pseudovirions tested, with a 50% inhibitory concentration (IC(50)) of 130 to 1,000 pM, regardless of reporter construct and without impacting cellular viability. Conversely, XXI does not inhibit in vitro infection by adenovirus or pseudovirions derived from the BK or Merkel cell polyomaviruses. Vaginal application of XXI prevents infection of the mouse genital tract by human papillomavirus type 16 (HPV16) pseudovirions. Nicastrin and presenilin-1 are essential components of the γ-secretase complex, and mouse embryo fibroblasts deficient in any one of these components were not infected by HPV16, whereas wild-type and β-secretase (BACE1)-deficient cells were susceptible. Neither the uptake of HPV16 into Lamp-1-positive perinuclear vesicles nor the disassembly of capsid to reveal both internal L1 and L2 epitopes and bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU)-labeled encapsidated DNA is dependent upon γ-secretase activity. However, blockade of γ-secretase activity by XXI prevents the BrdU-labeled DNA encapsidated by HPV16 from reaching the ND10 subnuclear domains. Since prior studies indicate that L2 is critical for endosomal escape and targeting of the viral DNA to ND10 and that γ secretase is located in endosomal membranes, our findings suggest that either L2 or an intracellular receptor are cleaved by γ secretase as papillomavirus escapes the endosome.

Number:  239
UID:  20693630
Founded words:  ['interacts', 'interacts', 'binds']
Abstract:  The copper chaperone for superoxide dismutase (CCS) binds to both the β-site AβPP cleaving enzyme (BACE1) and to the neuronal adaptor protein X11α. BACE1 initiates AβPP processing to produce the amyloid-β (Aβ) peptide deposited in the brains of Alzheimer's disease patients. X11α also interacts directly with AβPP to inhibit Aβ production. However, whether CCS affects AβPP processing and Aβ production is not known. Here we show that loss of CCS increases Aβ production in both CCS knockout neurons and CCS siRNA-treated SHSY5Y cells and that this involves increased AβPP processing at the BACE1 site.

Number:  240
UID:  20679486
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Accumulation of tau into neurofibrillary tangles is a pathological consequence of Alzheimer's disease and other tauopathies. Failures of the quality control mechanisms by the heat shock proteins (Hsps) positively correlate with the appearance of such neurodegenerative diseases. However, in vivo genetic evidence for the roles of Hsps in neurodegeneration remains elusive. Hsp110 is a nucleotide exchange factor for Hsp70, and direct substrate binding to Hsp110 may facilitate substrate folding. Hsp70 complexes have been implicated in tau phosphorylation state and amyloid precursor protein (APP) processing. To provide evidence for a role for Hsp110 in central nervous system homeostasis, we have generated hsp110(-)(/)(-) mice. Our results show that hsp110(-)(/)(-) mice exhibit accumulation of hyperphosphorylated-tau (p-tau) and neurodegeneration. We also demonstrate that Hsp110 is in complexes with tau, other molecular chaperones, and protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A). Surprisingly, high levels of PP2A remain bound to tau but with significantly reduced activity in brain extracts from aged hsp110(-)(/)(-) mice compared to brain extracts from wild-type mice. Mice deficient in the Hsp110 partner (Hsp70) also exhibit a phenotype comparable to that of hsp110(-)(/)(-) mice, confirming a critical role for Hsp110-Hsp70 in maintaining tau in its unphosphorylated form during aging. In addition, crossing hsp110(-)(/)(-) mice with mice overexpressing mutant APP (APPβsw) leads to selective appearance of insoluble amyloid β42 (Aβ42), suggesting an essential role for Hsp110 in APP processing and Aβ generation. Thus, our findings provide in vivo evidence that Hsp110 plays a critical function in tau phosphorylation state through maintenance of efficient PP2A activity, confirming its role in pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease and other tauopathies.

Number:  241
UID:  20674096
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'interacting', 'interacting', 'interact', 'associated', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interacting', 'interacting', 'interact', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  Previous studies identified engulfment adapter phosphotyrosine binding (PTB) domain containing 1 (GULP1) as an NPXY-motif interactor of low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1) and suggested a potential relevance in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Since AD associated proteins amyloid-β A4 precursor protein (APP) and LRP1 were shown to interact with the PTB domain of Fe65 and several other adapters via their intracellular NPXY-motifs, we examined a possible interaction of GULP1 PTB domain with the YENPTY-motif of APP. Here we demonstrate that GULP1 is present in human hippocampal and neocortical neurons. Confocal live cell imaging revealed that coexpressed and endogenous GULP1 colocalizes with APP in the Golgi and endoplasmic reticulum. Analysis of the interacting domains by co-immunoprecipitation of point and deletion mutants revealed that the interaction depends on the PTB domain of GULP1 and the YENPTY-motif of APP. Coexpression of GULP1 affected APP cell surface localization and suppressed generation of Aβ40/42 and sAPPα. Taken together, these data identify GULP1 as a novel neuronal APP interacting protein that alters trafficking and processing of APP.

Number:  242
UID:  20600777
Founded words:  ['regulation', 'regulation']
Abstract:  Galantamine (Gal) is an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor and used to treat the symptoms of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Recent studies show that Gal may affect amyloid precursor protein (APP) metabolism and increase release of secretory APPα (sAPPα). However the effect of Gal on amyloid-β peptide (Aβ) release and β-site cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) expression is still unknown. Consequently, we investigated the effect of Gal on the level of Aβ and BACE1. In a differentiated human neuroblastoma cell line (SH-SY5Y), Gal (0.3 μM) was found to significantly decrease Aβ release and BACE1 expression following treatment for 6, 12, and 24h. Increasing Gal to 0.9 μM or 10 μM had no further effect. The effect of Gal (0.3 μM for 18h) was maximal on BACE1 expression but not on Aβ secretion. At higher concentration (0.9 μM and 10 μM), Gal had no effect on the level of full-length APP but could still stimulate further decrease in Aβ secretion and release of sAPPα. These observations suggested that 0.3 μM Gal exerts its effect on Aβ production by inhibiting BACE1 expression, while 0.9 μM or 10 μM Gal mainly reduces Aβ production by stimulating the non-amyloidogenic pathway to decrease the amount of APP substrate available for β-secretase cleavage. In addition, α7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (α7nAChR) and multiple second messengers (including PKC, MEK, and p38MAPK) were found to be involved in the regulation of Gal-inhibited Aβ release and BACE1 expression.

Number:  243
UID:  20599477
Founded words:  ['mediated']
Abstract:  Hypoxia which is mainly mediated by hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1), can greatly contribute to the occurrence of Alzheimer's disease (AD) by increasing beta-site APP cleaving enzyme (BACE1) gene expression, protein level and beta-secretase activity, resulting in a significant generation of amyloid-beta (Abeta). Salidroside has been reported to have great neuroprotective effects. The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of salidroside on hypoxia-induced abnormal processing of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) in SH-SY5Y cells and its possible mechanism. Western blot analysis showed that 200muM of salidroside pretreatment significantly decreased BACE1 protein level and promoted the secretion of sAPPalpha in hypoxic condition. Salidroside had no effect on the level of APP, ADAM10 and ADAM17. ELISA analysis revealed that salidroside was able to inhibit the increase of beta-secretase activity and Abeta generation induced by hypoxia, with no effect on gamma-secretase activity. Notably, under hypoxia condition, mRNA of BACE1 and protein level of HIF-1alpha were decreased by salidroside pretreatment. These results demonstrated for the first time that salidroside was able to attenuate abnormal processing of amyloid precursor protein induced by hypoxia in SH-SY5Y cells, providing a new insight into prevention and treatment of Alzheimer's disease.

Number:  244
UID:  20523023
Founded words:  ['regulate', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  A key event in Alzheimer's disease pathology is the proteolytic processing of amyloid precursor protein (APP), whereby β-amyloid (Aβ) peptide is produced. Oestrogen is acknowledged to influence cognitive function and has been shown to regulate the secretory metabolism of APP and decrease the production of Aβ, thereby protecting the brain from neurodegeneration. The mechanism for this effect is unknown.

Number:  245
UID:  20523023
Founded words:  ['regulation', 'regulation']
Abstract:  To investigate possible oestrogen regulation of the expression of the APP processing enzymes at the gene and/or protein level.

Number:  246
UID:  20523023
Founded words:  ['regulation', 'regulation']
Abstract:  Oestrogen is involved in the regulation of the gene expression of TACE and presenilin 1. Most importantly, BACE protein expression was downregulated by oestrogen treatment in mixed neuronal/glial cell cultures. Our results also show the cellular localization of the secretases in human neurons and glial cells, which has been thoroughly discussed in the light of the localization of APP processing.

Number:  247
UID:  20523023
Founded words:  ['regulating', 'regulating']
Abstract:  Our results indicate that oestrogen may affect APP processing directly by regulating the expression of the involved enzymes.

Number:  248
UID:  20484053
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'binding', 'bind', 'bind', 'bind', 'binding', 'bind', 'bind', 'bind', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulate', 'regulate']
Abstract:  BACE1 (beta-site amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzyme 1) is a membrane-tethered member of the aspartyl proteases, essential for the production of beta-amyloid, a toxic peptide that accumulates in the brain of subjects affected by Alzheimer disease. The BACE1 C-terminal fragment contains a DXXLL motif that has been shown to bind the VHS (VPS27, Hrs, and STAM) domain of GGA1-3 (Golgi-localized gamma-ear-containing ARF-binding proteins). GGAs are trafficking molecules involved in the transport of proteins containing the DXXLL signal from the Golgi complex to endosomes. Moreover, GGAs bind ubiquitin and traffic synthetic and endosomal ubiquitinated cargoes to lysosomes. We have previously shown that depletion of GGA3 results in increased BACE1 levels and activity because of impaired lysosomal degradation. Here, we report that the accumulation of BACE1 is rescued by the ectopic expression of GGA3 in H4 neuroglioma cells depleted of GGA3. Accordingly, the overexpression of GGA3 reduces the levels of BACE1 and beta-amyloid. We then established that mutations in the GGA3 VPS27, Hrs, and STAM domain (N91A) or in BACE1 di-leucine motif (L499A/L500A), able to abrogate their binding, did not affect the ability of ectopically expressed GGA3 to rescue BACE1 accumulation in cells depleted of GGA3. Instead, we found that BACE1 is ubiquitinated at lysine 501 and is mainly monoubiquitinated and Lys-63-linked polyubiquitinated. Finally, a GGA3 mutant with reduced ability to bind ubiquitin (GGA3L276A) was unable to regulate BACE1 levels both in rescue and overexpression experiments. These findings indicate that levels of GGA3 tightly and inversely regulate BACE1 levels via interaction with ubiquitin sorting machinery.

Number:  249
UID:  20453200
Founded words:  ['regulating', 'regulating', 'regulate', 'regulating', 'regulating', 'regulates', 'regulates']
Abstract:  Proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) is a secreted protein that regulates hepatic low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) levels in humans. PCSK9 has also been shown to regulate the levels of additional membrane-bound proteins in vitro, including the very low-density lipoprotein receptor (VLDLR), apolipoprotein E receptor 2 (ApoER2) and the beta-site amyloid precursor protein (APP)-cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1), which are all highly expressed in the CNS and have been implicated in Alzheimer's disease. To better understand the role of PCSK9 in regulating these additional target proteins in vivo, their steady-state levels were measured in the brain of wild-type, PCSK9-deficient, and human PCSK9 overexpressing transgenic mice. We found that while PCSK9 directly bound to recombinant LDLR, VLDLR, and apoER2 protein in vitro, changes in PCSK9 expression did not alter the level of these receptors in the mouse brain. In addition, we found no evidence that PCSK9 regulates BACE1 levels or APP processing in the mouse brain. In conclusion, our results suggest that while PCSK9 plays an important role in regulating circulating LDL cholesterol levels by reducing the number of hepatic LDLRs, it does not appear to modulate the levels of LDLR and other membrane-bound proteins in the adult mouse brain.

Number:  250
UID:  20418378
Founded words:  ['binding', 'bind', 'binding', 'bind', 'mediates', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  gamma-Secretase is a multimeric membrane protein complex composed of presenilin (PS), nicastrin, Aph-1, and Pen-2, which mediates intramembrane proteolysis of a range of type I transmembrane proteins. We previously analyzed the functional roles of the N-terminal transmembrane domains (TMDs) 1-6 of PS1 in the assembly and proteolytic activity of the gamma-secretase using a series of TMD-swap PS1 mutants. Here we applied the TMD-swap method to all the TMDs of PS1 for the structure-function analysis of the proteolytic mechanism of gamma-secretase. We found that TMD2- or -6-swapped mutant PS1 failed to bind the helical peptide-based, substrate-mimic gamma-secretase inhibitor. Cross-linking experiments revealed that both TMD2 and TMD6 of PS1 locate in proximity to the TMD9, the latter being implicated in the initial substrate binding. Taken together, our data suggest that TMD2 and the luminal side of TMD6 are involved in the formation of the initial substrate-binding site of the gamma-secretase complex.

Number:  251
UID:  20412384
Founded words:  ['functioned']
Abstract:  Alzheimer's disease (AD) characterizes a progressive neurodegenerative disorder of the brain, while AD patients are afflicted with irreversible loss of neurons and further the intellectual abilities including memory and reasoning. One of the typical hallmarks of AD is the deposition of senile plaque that is contributed mainly by amyloid-beta (Abeta), whose production is initiated by beta-site amyloid precursor protein (APP)-cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1). Inhibition of BACE1 is thereby regarded as an attractive strategy for anti-AD drug discovery. Here, we reported that the natural product 2,2',4'-trihydroxychalcone (TDC) from Glycyrrhiza glabra functioned as a specific non-competitive inhibitor against BACE1 enzyme, and potently repressed beta-cleavage of APP and production of Abeta in human embryo kidney cells-APPswe cells. Moreover, the amelioration ability of this compound against the in vivo memory impairment was further evaluated by APP-PS1 double transgenic mice model. It is discovered that treatment of 9 mg/kg/day of TDC could obviously decrease Abeta production and Abeta plaque formation, while efficiently improve the memory impairment based on Morris water maze test. Our findings thus demonstrated that the natural product TDC as a new BACE1 inhibitor could ameliorate memory impairment in mice, and is expected to be potentially used as a lead compound for further anti-AD reagent development.

Number:  252
UID:  20399652
Founded words:  ['bind', 'bind']
Abstract:  We have identified macrocyclic inhibitors of the aspartic protease BACE, implicated in the etiology of Alzheimer's disease. An X-ray structure of screening hit 1 in the BACE active site revealed a hairpin conformation suggesting that constrained macrocyclic derivatives may also bind there. Several of the analogs we prepared were >100x more potent than 1, such as 7 (5 nM K(i)).

Number:  253
UID:  20354142
Founded words:  ['mediates', 'mediates', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulating', 'regulating']
Abstract:  The beta-site APP cleaving enzyme-1 (BACE1) mediates the first cleavage of the beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP) to yield the amyloid beta-peptide (Abeta), a key pathogenic agent in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Using a proteomic approach based on in-cell chemical cross-linking and tandem affinity purification (TAP), we herein identify sorting nexin 6 (SNX6) as a BACE1-associated protein. SNX6, a PX domain protein, is a putative component of retromer, a multiprotein cargo complex that mediates the retrograde trafficking of the cation-independent mannose-6-phosphate receptor (CI-MPR) and sortilin. RNA interference suppression of SNX6 increased BACE1-dependent secretion of soluble APP (sAPPbeta) and cell-associated fragments (C99), resulting in increased Abeta secretion. Furthermore, SNX6 reduction led to elevated steady-state BACE1 levels as well as increased retrograde transport of BACE1 in the endocytic pathway, suggesting that SNX6 modulates the retrograde trafficking and basal levels of BACE1, thereby regulating BACE1-mediated APP processing and Abeta biogenesis. Our study identifies a novel cellular pathway by which SNX6 negatively modulates BACE1-mediated cleavage of APP.

Number:  254
UID:  20236612
Founded words:  ['regulatory', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  Sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM) is the most common muscle disease of older persons. Its muscle-fiber phenotype shares several molecular similarities with Alzheimer-disease (AD) brain, including increased AbetaPP, accumulation of amyloid-beta (Abeta), and increased BACE1 protein. Abeta42 is prominently increased in AD brain and within s-IBM fibers, and its oligomers are putatively toxic to both tissues--accordingly, minimizing Abeta42 production can be a therapeutic objective in both tissues. The pathogenic development of s-IBM is unknown, including the mechanisms of BACE1 protein increase. BACE1 is an enzyme essential for production from AbetaPP of Abeta42 and Abeta40, which are proposed to be detrimental within s-IBM muscle fibers. Novel noncoding BACE1-antisense (BACE1-AS) was recently shown (a) to be increased in AD brain, and (b) to increase BACE1 mRNA and BACE1 protein. We studied BACE1-AS and BACE1 transcripts by real-time PCR (a) in 10 s-IBM and 10 age-matched normal muscle biopsies; and (b) in our established ER-Stress-Human-Muscle-Culture-IBM Model, in which we previously demonstrated increased BACE1 protein. Our study demonstrated for the first time that (a) in s-IBM biopsies BACE1-AS and BACE1 transcripts were significantly increased, suggesting that their increased expression can be responsible for the increase of BACE1 protein; and (b) experimental induction of ER stress significantly increased both BACE1-AS and BACE1 transcripts, suggesting that ER stress can participate in their induction in s-IBM muscle. Accordingly, decreasing BACE1 through a targeted downregulation of its regulatory BACE1-AS, or reducing ER stress, might be therapeutic strategies in s-IBM, assuming that it would not impair any normal cellular functions of BACE1.

Number:  255
UID:  20224283
Founded words:  ['interact', 'interact', 'binds']
Abstract:  The beta-site APP cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) is a major target for drug design in Alzheimer's disease. BACE1 binds strongly to heparin and other glycosaminoglycans, and there is evidence that the enzyme may interact with proteoglycans in vivo. Several studies suggest that heparin or heparan sulfate analogues may have value as therapeutic agents for the treatment of AD.

Number:  256
UID:  20224283
Founded words:  ['mediated']
Abstract:  Treatment of cortical neurons with heparin inhibited Abeta secretion. However, this effect was not mediated via inhibition of BACE1.

Number:  257
UID:  20212127
Founded words:  ['mediated', 'regulate']
Abstract:  Neuregulin-1 (NRG1) and Disrupted-in-Schizophrenia-1 (DISC1) are promising susceptibility factors for schizophrenia. Both are multifunctional proteins with roles in a variety of neurodevelopmental processes, including progenitor cell proliferation, migration, and differentiation. Here, we provide evidence linking these factors together in a single pathway, which is mediated by ErbB receptors and PI3K/Akt. We show that signaling by NRG1 and NRG2, but not NRG3, increase expression of an isoform of DISC1 in vitro. Receptors ErbB2 and ErbB3, but not ErbB4, are responsible for transducing this effect, and PI3K/Akt signaling is also required. In NRG1 knockout mice, this DISC1 isoform is selectively reduced during neurodevelopment. Furthermore, a similar decrease in DISC1 expression is seen in beta-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme-1 (BACE1) knockout mice, in which NRG1/Akt signaling is reportedly impaired. In contrast to neuronal DISC1 that was reported and characterized, expression of DISC1 in other types of cells in the brain has not been addressed. Here we demonstrate that DISC1, like NRG and ErbB proteins, is expressed in neurons, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, microglia, and radial progenitors. These findings may connect NRG1, ErbBs, Akt, and DISC1 in a common pathway, which may regulate neurodevelopment and contribute to susceptibility to schizophrenia.

Number:  258
UID:  20176482
Founded words:  ['interacts', 'interacts']
Abstract:  The optimization of tertiary carbinamine derived inhibitors of BACE1 from its discovery as an unstable lead to low nanomolar cell active compounds is described. Five-membered heterocycles are reported as stable and potency enhancing linkers. In the course of this work, we have discovered a clear trend where the activity of inhibitors at a given assay pH is dependent on pK(a) of the amino group that interacts directly with the catalytic aspartates. The potency of compounds as inhibitors of Alphabeta production in a cell culture assay correlated much better with BACE1 enzyme potency measured at pH 7.5 than at pH 4.5.

Number:  259
UID:  20163459
Founded words:  ['regulating', 'regulated', 'regulated', 'regulated', 'regulated', 'regulating', 'functions', 'functions', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  The amyloid precursor family of proteins are of considerable interest, both because of their role in Alzheimer's disease pathogenesis and because of their normal physiological functions. In mammals, the amyloid precursor protein (APP) has two homologs, amyloid precursor-like protein (APLP) 1 and APLP2. All three proteins undergo ectodomain shedding and regulated intramembrane proteolysis, and important functions have been attributed to the full-length proteins, shed ectodomains, C-terminal fragments and intracellular domains (ICDs). One of the proteases that is known to cleave APP and that is essential for generation of the amyloid beta-protein is the beta-site APP-cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1). Here, we investigated the effects of genetic manipulation of BACE1 on the processing of the APP family of proteins. BACE1 expression regulated the levels and species of full-length APLP1, APP and APLP2, of their shed ectodomains, and of their membrane-bound C-terminal fragments. In particular, APP processing appears to be tightly regulated, with changes in beta-cleaved APPs (APPsbeta) being compensated for by changes in alpha-cleaved APPs (APPsalpha). In contrast, the total levels of soluble cleaved APLP1 and APLP2 species were less tightly regulated, and fluctuated with BACE1 expression. Importantly, the production of ICDs for all three proteins was not decreased by loss of BACE1 activity. These results indicate that BACE1 is involved in regulating ectodomain shedding, maturation and trafficking of the APP family of proteins. Consequently, whereas inhibition of BACE1 is unlikely to adversely affect potential ICD-mediated signaling, it may alter other important facets of amyloid precursor-like protein/APP biology.

Number:  260
UID:  20111991
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction']
Abstract:  Amyloid beta peptide (Abeta), generated by proteolytic cleavage of the amyloid precursor protein (APP), plays a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). The key step in the generation of Abeta is cleavage of APP by beta-secretases (beta-site APP-cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) and BACE2). There has been suggestion of interaction between aluminum and several AD-associated pathways. However, the underlying mechanisms still remain unclear. Here, we report the effects of aluminum chloride (AlCl(3)) in Abeta-induced toxicity using differentiated neuronal SH-SY5Y cells. The metal significantly enhances Abeta-induced cell death at concentrations ranging from 50 to 300 microM after 24 and 48 h. After 72 and 96 h treatment, cell death is increased already at 10 microM. Early coexposure of cells to 10 microM AlCl(3) and 2 microM Abeta differentially affected beta-secretase mRNA levels as compared to single Abeta treatment after 1 and 3 h. BACE1 levels were slightly reduced after 1 h and significantly increased after 3 h exposure, whereas BACE2 levels were increased at both times considered. Both genes' mRNA levels were downregulated at longer times (6, 12, and 24 h). Although these results indicate that aluminum toxicity is correlated to changes in both BACE1 and BACE2 expression levels, the subsequent common downregulation observed suggests that aluminum involvement in the Abeta cascade is subtle, and other underlying mechanisms might be involved.

Number:  261
UID:  20043700
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interactions']
Abstract:  Fragment-based NMR screening, X-ray crystallography, structure-based design, and focused chemical library design were used to identify novel inhibitors for BACE-1. A rapid optimization of an initial NMR hit was achieved by a combination of NMR and a functional assay, resulting in the identification of an isothiourea hit with a K(d) of 15 microM for BACE-1. NMR data and the crystal structure revealed that this hit makes H-bond interactions with the two catalytic aspartates, occupies the nonprime side region of the active site of BACE-1, and extends toward the S3 subpocket (S3sp). A focused NMR-based search for heterocyclic isothiourea isosteres resulted in several distinct classes of BACE-1 active site directed compounds with improved chemical stability and physicochemical properties. The strategy for optimization of the 2-aminopyridine lead series to potent inhibitors of BACE-1 was demonstrated. The structure-based design of a cyclic acylguanidine lead series and its optimization into nanomolar BACE-1 inhibitors are the subject of the companion paper

Number:  262
UID:  20043696
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interact', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interact', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  A number of novel amidine containing heterocycles were designed to reproduce the unique interaction pattern, revealed by X-ray crystallography, between the BACE-1 catalytic diad and a weak NMR screening hit (3), with special attention paid to maintaining the appropriate basicity and limiting the number of H-bonding donors of these scaffolds. The iminohydantoin cores (10 and 23) were examined first and found to interact with the catalytic diad in one of two binding modes (A and B), each with the iminohydantoin core flipped 180 degrees in relation to the other. The amidine structural motif within each core forms a bidentate interaction with a different aspartic acid of the catalytic diad. Both modes reproduced a highly conserved interaction pattern between the inhibitors and the catalytic aspartates, as revealed by 3. Potent iminohydantoin BACE-1 inhibitors have been obtained, validating the molecular design as aspartyl protease catalytic site inhibitors. Brain penetrant small molecule BACE inhibitors with high ligand efficiencies have been discovered, enabling multiple strategies for further development of these inhibitors into highly potent, selective and in vivo efficacious BACE inhibitors.

Number:  263
UID:  20041192
Founded words:  ['regulate', 'regulate', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  Beta-site APP cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) is a transmembrane aspartyl protease with a lumenal active site that sheds the ectodomains of membrane proteins through juxtamembrane proteolysis. BACE1 has been studied principally for its role in Alzheimer's disease as the beta-secretase responsible for generating the amyloid-beta protein. Emerging evidence from mouse models has identified the importance of BACE1 in myelination and cognitive performance. However, the substrates that BACE1 processes to regulate these functions are unknown, and to date only a few beta-secretase substrates have been identified through candidate-based studies. Using an unbiased approach to substrate identification, we performed quantitative proteomic analysis of two human epithelial cell lines stably expressing BACE1 and identified 68 putative beta-secretase substrates, a number of which we validated in a cell culture system. The vast majority were of type I transmembrane topology, although one was type II and three were GPI-linked proteins. Intriguingly, a preponderance of these proteins are involved in contact-dependent intercellular communication or serve as receptors and have recognized roles in the nervous system and other organs. No consistent sequence motif predicting BACE1 cleavage was identified in substrates versus non-substrates. These findings expand our understanding of the proteins and cellular processes that BACE1 may regulate, and suggest possible mechanisms of toxicity arising from chronic BACE1 inhibition.

Number:  264
UID:  19968289
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interactions', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  The identification of small molecule aminohydantoins as potent and selective human beta-secretase inhibitors is reported. These analogues exhibit low nannomolar potency for BACE1, show comparable activity in a cell-based (ELISA) assay, and demonstrate >100x selectivity for the other structurally related aspartyl proteases BACE2, cathepsinD, renin, and pepsin. On the basis of the cocrystal structure of the HTS-hit 2 in the BACE1 active site and by use of a structure-based drug design approach, we methodically explored the comparatively large binding pocket of the BACE1 enzyme and identified key interactions between the ligand and the protein that contributed to the affinity. One of the more potent compounds, (S)-55, displayed an IC(50) value for BACE1 of 10 nM and exhibited comparable cellular activity (EC(50) = 20 nM) in the ELISA assay. Acute oral administration of (S)-55 at 100 mg/kg resulted in a 69% reduction of plasma A beta(40) at 8 h in a Tg2576 mouse (p < 0.001).

Number:  265
UID:  19959359
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interactions']
Abstract:  8,8-Diphenyl-2,3,4,8-tetrahydroimidazo[1,5-a]pyrimidin-6-amine (1) was identified through HTS, as a weak (micromolar) inhibitor of BACE1. X-Ray crystallographic studies indicate the 2-aminoimidazole ring forms key H-bonding interactions with Asp32 and Asp228 in the catalytic site of BACE1. Lead optimization using structure-based focused libraries led to the identification of low nanomolar BACE1 inhibitors such as 20b with substituents which extend from the S(1) to the S(3) pocket.

Number:  266
UID:  19815556
Founded words:  ['activated', 'associated', 'mediator', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Seladin-1 is a neuroprotective protein selectively down-regulated in brain regions affected in Alzheimer disease (AD). Seladin-1 protects cells against beta-amyloid (Abeta) peptide 42- and oxidative stress-induced apoptosis activated by caspase-3, a key mediator of apoptosis. Here, we have employed RNA interference to assess the molecular effects of seladin-1 down-regulation on the beta-secretase (BACE1) function and beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP) processing in SH-SY5Y human neuroblastoma cells in both normal and apoptotic conditions. Our results show that approximately 60% reduction in seladin-1 protein levels, resembling the decrease observed in AD brain, did not significantly affect APP processing or Abeta secretion in normal growth conditions. However, under apoptosis, seladin-1 small interfering RNA (siRNA)-transfected cells showed increased caspase-3 activity on average by 2-fold when compared with control siRNA-transfected cells. Increased caspase-3 activity coincided with a significant depletion of the BACE1-sorting protein, GGA3 (Golgi-localized gamma-ear-containing ADP-ribosylation factor-binding protein), and subsequently augmented BACE1 protein levels and activity. Augmented BACE1 activity in turn correlated with the enhanced beta-amyloidogenic processing of APP and ultimately increased Abeta production. These adverse changes associated with decreased cell viability in seladin-1 siRNA-transfected cells under apoptosis. No changes in GGA3 or BACE1 levels were found after seladin-1 knockdown in normal growth conditions. Collectively, our results suggest that under stress conditions, reduced seladin-1 expression results in enhanced GGA3 depletion, which further leads to augmented post-translational stabilization of BACE1 and increased beta-amyloidogenic processing of APP. These mechanistic findings related to seladin-1 down-regulation are important in the context of AD as the oxidative stress-induced apoptosis plays a key role in the disease pathogenesis.

Number:  267
UID:  19773363
Founded words:  ['complexes', 'complexes']
Abstract:  Proteolytic processing of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) occurs via two alternative pathways, localized to different subcellular compartments, which result in functionally distinct outcomes. Cleavage by a beta-gamma sequence generates the Abeta peptide that plays a central role in Alzheimer's disease. In the case of alpha-gamma cleavage, a secreted neurotrophic molecule is generated and the Abeta peptide cleaved and destroyed. In both cases, a cytosolic APP intracellular domain (AICD) is generated. We have previously shown that coexpression of APP with the APP-binding protein Fe65 and the histone acetyltransferase Tip60 results in the formation of nuclear complexes (termed AFT complexes), which localize to transcription sites. We now show that blocking endocytosis or the pharmacological or genetic inhibition of the endosomal beta-cleavage pathway reduces translocation of AICD to these nuclear AFT complexes. AICD signaling further depends on active transport along microtubules and can be modulated by interference with both anterograde and retrograde transport systems. Nuclear signaling by endogenous AICD in primary neurons could similarly be blocked by inhibiting beta-cleavage but not by alpha-cleavage inhibition. This suggests that amyloidogenic cleavage, despite representing the minor cleavage pathway of APP, is predominantly responsible for AICD-mediated nuclear signaling.

Number:  268
UID:  19757823
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  The identification of small molecule aminoimidazoles as potent and selective human beta-secretase inhibitors is reported. These analogues demonstrate low nannomolar potency for BACE1 in a FRET assay, exhibit comparable activity in a cell-based (ELISA) assay, and show >100x selectivity for the other structurally related aspartyl proteases BACE2, cathepsin D, renin, and pepsin. Our design strategy was supported by molecular modeling studies based on the cocrystal structure of the HTS-hit 3 in the BACE1 active site. These strategies enabled us to integrate pyridine and pyrimidine groups on 3 extending deep into the S3 region of the BACE1 binding pocket and enhancing the ligand's potency. Compound (R)-37 displayed an IC50 value for BACE1 of 20 nM, cellular activity of 90 nM, and >100-fold selectivity over related aspartyl proteases. Acute oral administration of (R)-37 at 30 mg/kg resulted in a significant 71% reduction of plasma Abeta40 measured at the 6 h time point in a Tg2576 mouse model (p < 0.001).

Number:  269
UID:  19682432
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulatory', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulates']
Abstract:  Regulation of proteolytic cleavage of the amyloid precursor protein by the aspartic protease BACE may occur by alternative splicing and the generation of enzymatically inactive forms. In fact, the presence of exonic donor and acceptor sites for intron 3 generates the two deficient variants BACE457 and BACE476. In HEK293 cells, when introns are inserted separately in the BACE cDNA, we found that whilst introns 2 and 4 are efficiently spliced out, intron 3 is not removed. On the other hand, splicing to wild-type BACE is restored when intron 3 is flanked by the two other introns. The presence of all three introns also leads to alternative splicing of intron 3 and the generation of BACE476. In contrast, BACE457 expression takes place only after mutating the donor splice site of intron 3, indicating that additional regulatory elements are necessary for the use of the splicing site within exon 4. Overall, our data demonstrate that a complex splicing of intron 3 regulates the maturation of the BACE mRNA. This appears orchestrated by domains present in the exons and introns flanking intron 3. Excessive BACE activity is a risk factor for Alzheimer's disease, therefore this complex regulation might guarantee low neuronal BACE activity and disease prevention.

Number:  270
UID:  19679113
Founded words:  ['associated']
Abstract:  ADAM10 (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase 10) is the principal alpha-secretase responsible for the non-amyloidogenic processing of the Alzheimer's disease (AD)-associated amyloid precursor protein (APP). A reciprocal relationship exists between non-amyloidogenic and amyloidogenic APP processing such that impaired ADAM10-mediated proteolysis of the protein serves to enhance amyloidogenic processing (by beta- and gamma-secretases) thereby elevating levels of the amyloid beta (A beta)-peptides responsible for the neuronal death observed in the AD-afflicted brain. It has previously been demonstrated that the amyloidogenic processing of APP occurs within specialized regions of the cell membrane known as lipid rafts. Conversely, ADAM10-mediated non-amyloidogenic processing is thought to occur in the non-raft region of the membrane with the majority of ADAM10 being excluded from rafts. In the current study, we hypothesized that the exclusion of ADAM10 from rafts may leave the APP substrate particularly susceptible to alternative beta-secretase cleavage within these microdomains. In order to test this hypothesis, we targeted ADAM10 to rafts by replacing its transmembrane and cytosolic regions with a glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor and examined the associated effects on APP proteolysis. We found that whereas wild-type ADAM10 was exclusively present in the non-raft region of the membrane where it enhanced non-amyloidogenic APP proteolysis, GPI-anchored ADAM10 was effectively targeted to rafts where it competed with beta-secretase thereby reducing amyloidogenic APP processing. These results indicate that it is the exclusion of ADAM10 from rafts rather than simply the raft localization of beta- and gamma-secretases that underlies A beta-peptide generation within these cellular structures.

Number:  271
UID:  19659691
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'bind', 'bind', 'regulate', 'regulate']
Abstract:  Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by the formation of extracellular senile plaques in the brain, whose major component is a small peptide called beta-amyloid (Abeta). Long-term use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) has been found beneficial for AD and several reports suggest that NSAIDs reduce the generation of Abeta, especially the more amyloidogenic form Abeta42. However, the exact mechanism underlying NSAIDs' effect on AD risk remains largely inconclusive and all clinical trials using NSAIDs for AD treatment show negative results so far. Recent studies have shown that some NSAIDs can bind to certain nuclear receptors, suggesting that nuclear receptors may be involved in NSAID's effect on AD risk. Here we find that (R)-flurbiprofen, the R-enantiomer of the racemate NSAID flurbiprofen, can significantly reduce Abeta secretion, but at the same time, increases the level of intracellular Abeta. In addition, we find that a nuclear receptor, retinoid X receptor alpha (RXRalpha), can regulate Abeta generation and that down-regulation of RXRalpha significantly increases Abeta secretion. We also show that (R)-flurbiprofen can interfere with the interaction between RXRalpha and 9-cis-retinoid acid, and that 9-cis-retinoid acid decreases (R)-flurbiprofen's reduction of Abeta secretion. Moreover, the modulation effect of (R)-flurbiprofen on Abeta is abolished upon RXRalpha down-regulation. Together, these results suggest that RXRalpha can regulate Abeta generation and is also required for (R)-flurbiprofen-mediated Abeta generation.

Number:  272
UID:  19564338
Founded words:  ['activation', 'mediated', 'regulate']
Abstract:  The cellular prion protein (PrP(C)) is essential for the pathogenesis and transmission of prion diseases. PrP(C) is bound to the plasma membrane via a glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor, although a secreted, soluble form has also been identified. Previously we reported that PrP(C) is subject to ectodomain shedding from the membrane by zinc metalloproteinases with a similar inhibition profile to those involved in shedding the amyloid precursor protein. Here we have used gain-of-function (overexpression) and loss-of-function (small interfering RNA knockdown) experiments in cells to identify the ADAMs (a disintegrin and metalloproteinases) involved in the ectodomain shedding of PrP(C). These experiments revealed that ADAM9 and ADAM10, but not ADAM17, are involved in the shedding of PrP(C) and that ADAM9 exerts its effect on PrP(C) shedding via ADAM10. Using dominant negative, catalytically inactive mutants, we show that the catalytic activity of ADAM9 is required for its effect on ADAM10. Mass spectrometric analysis revealed that ADAM10, but not ADAM9, cleaved PrP between Gly(228) and Arg(229), three residues away from the site of glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor attachment. The shedding of another membrane protein, the amyloid precursor protein beta-secretase BACE1, by ADAM9 is also mediated via ADAM10. Furthermore, we show that pharmacological inhibition of PrP(C) shedding or activation of both PrP(C) and PrP(Sc) shedding by ADAM10 overexpression in scrapie-infected neuroblastoma N2a cells does not alter the formation of proteinase K-resistant PrP(Sc). Collectively, these data indicate that although PrP(C) can be shed through the action of ADAM family members, modulation of PrP(C) or PrP(Sc) ectodomain shedding does not regulate prion conversion.

Number:  273
UID:  19536656
Founded words:  ['mediate', 'mediated', 'mediate', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulatory', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  In recent years, there has been a shift in the conventional paradigms for transcriptional and translational regulation as extensive sequencing efforts have yielded new insights into the landscape of the human genome and transcriptome. Hundreds of non-coding regulatory RNA molecules called microRNAs (miRNAs) have been identified in the mammalian central nervous system (CNS) and are reported to mediate pivotal roles in many aspects of neuronal functions. Disruption of miRNA-based post-transcriptional regulation has been implicated in a range of CNS disorders as one miRNA is predicted to impact the expression of numerous downstream mRNA targets. The intricate molecular networks mediated by an miRNA form a robust mechanism for rapid and potent responses to cellular events throughout the development of the human brain. Recent studies have identified a molecular and ultimately pathogenic role for a subset of miRNAs in Alzheimer's disease and schizophrenia, including the characterization of their downstream CNS mRNA targets, such as beta-secretase (BACE1) and calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII). Here, we present an overview of the current progress in miRNA research related to CNS disorders and also highlight the utility of LNA (locked nucleic acid)-modified oligonucleotides in the detection and modulation of miRNA activity.

Number:  274
UID:  19533374
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Fragment-based drug discovery (FBDD) represents a change in strategy from the screening of molecules with higher molecular weights and physical properties more akin to fully drug-like compounds, to the screening of smaller, less complex molecules. This is because it has been recognised that fragment hit molecules can be efficiently grown and optimised into leads, particularly after the binding mode to the target protein has been first determined by 3D structural elucidation, e.g. by NMR or X-ray crystallography. Several studies have shown that medicinal chemistry optimisation of an already drug-like hit or lead compound can result in a final compound with too high molecular weight and lipophilicity. The evolution of a lower molecular weight fragment hit therefore represents an attractive alternative approach to optimisation as it allows better control of compound properties. Computational chemistry can play an important role both prior to a fragment screen, in producing a target focussed fragment library, and post-screening in the evolution of a drug-like molecule from a fragment hit, both with and without the available fragment-target co-complex structure. We will review many of the current developments in the area and illustrate with some recent examples from successful FBDD discovery projects that we have conducted.

Number:  275
UID:  19508864
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activation', 'mediated', 'mediates']
Abstract:  The protease BACE1 (beta-site APP-cleaving enzyme 1) is essential for the generation of amyloid beta (Abeta) from amyloid precursor protein (APP). Although BACE1 is expressed primarily in neurons, which are a principal source of Abeta in the brain, the mechanism that underlies basal expression of BACE1 in neurons has not been studied thoroughly. In the present study, we found that endogenous BACE1 expression was mediated by constitutive JAK2/STAT1 activation in neurons. Inhibition of the JAK2/STAT1 signaling pathway, using AG490 (a JAK2 inhibitor), a dominant-negative form of STAT1, and SOCS1 and SOCS3 overexpression, reduced levels of BACE1 promoter activity, expression of endogenous BACE1, and generation of Abeta. These results were recapitulated in the SH-SY5Y neuronal cell line, primary cultured neurons, and mouse brains. Therefore, we propose that constitutive JAK2/STAT1 activation mediates endogenous BACE1 expression in neurons and that inhibition of JAK2/STAT1 signaling abrogates basal levels of BACE1 expression and Abeta generation.

Number:  276
UID:  19486882
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  BACE1 is a novel type I transmembrane aspartyl protease that has been implicated in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease. Cleavage of the amyloid precursor protein by the beta-secretase, BACE1, is the first step in the production of the Abeta peptide and is a prime target for therapeutic intervention. Using circular dichroism, we reveal that the secondary structure of BACE1 in a membrane environment is significantly different from what was determined from the previously resolved crystal structure, and, we provide the first evidence that show differences in stability between the active (pH 4.8) and inactive (pH 7.4) forms of BACE1. In this study we have also examined Ca(2+) binding to BACE1, the effect of this binding on the secondary and tertiary structural characteristics of BACE1, and the influence of this binding on the specific activity of the purified protein. Circular dichroism and endogenous tryptophan fluorescence measurements demonstrated that the secondary and tertiary structures, respectively, are sensitive to increasing concentrations of Ca(2+). Isothermal titration calorimetry was then used to characterize the Ca(2+)-BACE1 interaction in more detail. Our results suggest that there is a high affinity of binding (k(d) = 2.0 x microM) between Ca(2+) and BACE1 and that the binding process was exothermic (DeltaH= -3.5 kcal/mol). We also could demonstrate that low concentrations of Ca(2+) (microM range) significantly increased the proteolytic activity of BACE1. Collectively, these results identify a direct interaction between BACE1 and Ca(2+) and suggest that under physiological conditions, the function(s) of BACE1 must also be influenced by Ca(2+).

Number:  277
UID:  19429494
Founded words:  ['activates', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'functions', 'functions', 'function', 'function', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  beta-Secretase (beta-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme 1; BACE1) has been identified as the rate limiting enzyme for amyloid-beta-peptide (Abeta) production. Abeta is the major component of amyloid plaques and vascular deposits in Alzheimer's disease (AD) brains and believed to initiate the deadly amyloid cascade. BACE1 is the principle beta-secretase, since its knock-out completely prevents Abeta generation. BACE1 is likely to process a number of different substrates and consequently several independent physiological functions may be exerted by BACE1. Currently the function of BACE1 in myelination is best understood. BACE1 cleaves and activates Neuregulin-1 and is thus directly involved in myelination of the peripheral nervous system during early postnatal development. However, additional physiological functions specifically within the central nervous system are so far less understood. BACE1 is upregulated in at least some AD brains. Multiple cellular mechanisms for BACE1 regulation are known including post-transcriptional regulation via its 5'-untranslated region, microRNA and non-coding anti-sense RNA. BACE1 is a primary target for Abeta lowering therapies, however the development of high affinity bio-available inhibitors has been a major challenge so far.

Number:  278
UID:  19345096
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interactions', 'interactions', 'interactions']
Abstract:  Recently, we reported potent substrate-based pentapeptidic BACE1 inhibitors possessing a hydroxymethylcarbonyl isostere as a substrate transition-state mimic. Because these inhibitors contained some natural amino acids, we would need to improve their enzymatic stability in vivo and permeability across the blood-brain barrier, so that they become practically useful. Subsequently, non-peptidic and small-sized BACE1 inhibitors possessing a heterocyclic scaffold, 2,6-pyridenedicarboxylic, chelidamic or chelidonic moiety, at the P(2) position were reported. These inhibitors were designed based on the conformer of docked inhibitor in BACE1. In this study, we discuss the role and significance of interactions between Arg235 of BACE1 and its inhibitor in BACE1 inhibitory mechanism. Moreover, we designed more potent small-sized BACE1 inhibitors with a 2,6-pyridinedicarboxylic scaffold at the P(2) position, that were optimized for the interactions with Arg235 of BACE1.

Number:  279
UID:  19302194
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex', 'regulation', 'regulatory', 'regulation']
Abstract:  beta-site APP cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) is the transmembrane aspartyl protease that catalyzes the first cleavage step during proteolysis of the beta-amyloid precursor protein, a process involved in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer disease. BACE1 pre-mRNA undergoes complex alternative splicing, and cis-acting elements important for its regulation have not been identified. We constructed and compared several BACE1 minigenes and found that BACE1 sequence from exon 3 through exon 5 was required for minigenes to undergo correct splicing. Minigene splicing was validated by showing specific splicing inhibition upon splice site mutation. Furthermore, we showed that mutation of the minigene at a predicted exonic splicing enhancer in exon 4 of BACE1 increased exon 4 skipping. Therefore, we have for the first time found evidence of a regulatory site involved in BACE1 alternative splicing, and these data indicate that minor sequence changes can dramatically alter BACE1 alternative splicing.

Number:  280
UID:  19196715
Founded words:  ['mediates']
Abstract:  Mutations of the presenilin 1 (PS1) gene are the most common cause of early onset familial Alzheimer disease (FAD). PS1 mutations alter the activity of the gamma-secretase on the beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP), leading to selective overproduction of beta-amyloid (Abeta) 42 peptides, the species that forms oligomers that may exert toxic effects on neurons. Here we show that PS1 mutations, expressed both transiently and stably, in non-neuronal and neuronal cell lines increase the expression and the activity of the beta-secretase (BACE1), the rate-limiting step of Abeta production. Also, BACE1 expression and activity are elevated in brains of PS1 mutant knock-in mice compared with wild type littermates as well as in cerebral cortex of FAD cases bearing various PS1 mutations compared with in sporadic AD cases and controls. The up-regulation of BACE1 by PS1 mutations requires the gamma-secretase cleavage of APP and is proportional to the amount of secreted Abeta42. Abeta42, and not AICD (APP intracellular domain), is indeed the APP derivative that mediates the overexpression of BACE1. The effect of PS1 mutations on BACE1 may contribute to determine the wide clinical and pathological phenotype of early onset FAD.

Number:  281
UID:  19153172
Founded words:  ['association']
Abstract:  Here, we assess the association of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) BACE1 activity with multiple sclerosis (MS).

Number:  282
UID:  19064719
Founded words:  ['regulation', 'regulation', 'regulated', 'regulated', 'regulated']
Abstract:  Previous studies have shown that cathepsins control amyloid beta (Abeta) levels in chromaffin cells via a regulated secretory pathway. In the present study, this concept was extended to investigations in primary hippocampal neurons to test whether Abeta release was coregulated by cathepsins and electrical activity, proposed components of a regulated secretory pathway. Inhibition of cathepsin B (catB) activity with CA074Me or attenuation of catB expression through small interfering RNA produced decreases in Abeta release, similar to levels produced with suppression of beta-site APP-cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) expression. To test whether the catB-dependent release of Abeta was linked to ongoing electrical activity, neurons were treated with tetrodotoxin (TTX) and CA074Me. These comparisons demonstrated no additivity between decreases in Abeta release produced by TTX and CA074Me. In contrast, pharmacological inhibition of cathepsin L (catL) selectively elevated Abeta42 levels but not Abeta40 or total Abeta. Mechanistic studies measuring C-terminal fragments of amyloid precursor protein (APP) suggested that catL elevated alpha-secretase activity, thereby suppressing Abeta42 levels. The mechanism of catB-mediated regulation of Abeta release remains unclear but may involve elevation of beta-secretase. In summary, these studies provide evidence for a significant alternative pathway for APP processing that involves catB and activity-dependent release of Abeta in a regulated secretory pathway for primary neurons.

Number:  283
UID:  19056495
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  The beta-site APP-cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) is widely known for its pivotal role in the amyloidogenic pathway leading to Alzheimer's disease. Here, we elaborate on the recent finding that auxiliary subunits of voltage-gated sodium channels (beta2 and beta4) are BACE substrates. BACE1 produced complex effects on sodium channel gating that could be only partially explained by beta2/beta4 cleavage. To characterize the unexpected non-proteolytic effect of BACE1, we examined HEK cells co-transfected with only Nav1.2 and either normal or catalytically inactive BACE1. Both BACE1 variants produced virtually identical effects on sodium channel gating, which would lead to enhanced cellular excitability. The non-proteolytic BACE1 effect on Nav1.2 current was confirmed in murine neuroblastoma cells, which express sodium channels endogenously, but lack beta2 and beta4. Our study reveals an important facet of BACE1 function that should help to decipher the role of BACE1 in normal and demented brain.

Number:  284
UID:  19013792
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  A series of transition state analogues of beta-secretases 1 and 2 (BACE1, 2) inhibitors containing fused-ring or biaryl moieties were designed computationally to probe the S2 pocket, synthesized, and tested for BACE1 and BACE2 inhibitory activity. It has been shown that unlike the biaryl analogs, the fused-ring moiety is successfully accommodated in the BACE1 binding site resulting in the ligands with excellent inhibitory activity. Ligand 5b reduced 65% of Abeta40 production in N2a cells stably transfected with Swedish human APP.

Number:  285
UID:  19013073
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  The pharmacophore model of arylpiperazine amide derivatives was built using Discovery Studio 2.0 software package and the best pharmacophore model (Hypo 1) was validated by Enrichment and ROC method (EF at 2%, 5% and 10% are 30.6, 12.2 and 7.7; AUC of the ROC curve is 0.93). According to the best pharmacophore model, 11 N-phenyl-1-arylamide, N-phenylbenzenesulfonamide derivatives, compounds 26-28, and 33a-g, were designed to be synthesized and their BACE 1 inhibitory activities were determined experimentally. Their theoretical results were in good agreement with the experimental values. Compound 33d, which displayed the highest BACE 1 activity (18.33+/-2.80 micromol/L) among these two series, was chosen to study the protein binding pattern and the result showed that it was in close contact with two essential catalytic aspartates (Asp32 and Asp228) of the BACE 1.

Number:  286
UID:  19011241
Founded words:  ['interact', 'interact', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulate']
Abstract:  We have recently identified a novel form of post-translational regulation of BACE1 (beta-site amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzyme 1), a membrane protein that acts as the rate-limiting enzyme in the generation of the Alzheimer disease amyloid beta-peptide. Specifically, nascent BACE1 is transiently acetylated in seven lysine residues clustered in a highly disordered region of the protein that faces the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)/ER Golgi intermediate compartment (ER/ERGIC). The acetylation protects the nascent protein from degradation by PCSK9/NARC-1 in the ERGIC and allows it to reach the Golgi apparatus. Here we report the identification of two ER/ERGIC-based acetyltransferases, ATase1 and ATase2. Both proteins display acetyl-CoA:lysine acetyltransferase activity, can interact with and acetylate BACE1, and display an ER/ERGIC localization with the catalytic site facing the lumen of the organelle. Both ATase1 and ATase2 regulate the steady-state levels of BACE1 and the rate of amyloid beta-peptide generation. Finally, their transcripts are up-regulated by ceramide treatment. In conclusion, our studies have identified two new enzymes that may be involved in the pathogenesis of late-onset Alzheimer disease. The biochemical characterization of the above events could lead to the identification of novel pharmacological strategies for the prevention of this form of dementia.

Number:  287
UID:  18940784
Founded words:  ['interactive', 'interactive', 'complex', 'complexes', 'complex', 'regulators', 'regulating', 'regulating', 'regulates']
Abstract:  Voltage-gated Na(+) channels (VGSCs) exist as macromolecular complexes containing a pore-forming alpha subunit and one or more beta subunits. The VGSC alpha subunit gene family consists of 10 members, which have distinct tissue-specific and developmental expression profiles. So far, four beta subunits (beta1-beta4) and one splice variant of beta1 (beta1A, also called beta1B) have been identified. VGSC beta subunits are multifunctional, serving as modulators of channel activity, regulators of channel cell surface expression, and as members of the immunoglobulin superfamily, cell adhesion molecules (CAMs). beta subunits are substrates of beta-amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzyme (BACE1) and gamma-secretase, yielding intracellular domains (ICDs) that may further modulate cellular activity via transcription. Recent evidence shows that beta1 regulates migration and pathfinding in the developing postnatal CNS in vivo. The alpha and beta subunits, together with other components of the VGSC signaling complex, may have dynamic interactive roles depending on cell/tissue type, developmental stage, and pathophysiology. In addition to excitable cells like nerve and muscle, VGSC alpha and beta subunits are functionally expressed in cells that are traditionally considered nonexcitable, including glia, vascular endothelial cells, and cancer cells. In particular, the alpha subunits are up-regulated in line with metastatic potential and are proposed to enhance cellular migration and invasion. In contrast to the alpha subunits, beta1 is more highly expressed in weakly metastatic cancer cells, and evidence suggests that its expression enhances cellular adhesion. Thus, novel roles are emerging for VGSC alpha and beta subunits in regulating migration during normal postnatal development of the CNS as well as during cancer metastasis.

Number:  288
UID:  18936252
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'association', 'associates', 'associates', 'interaction', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulation']
Abstract:  Neuronal activity has an impact on beta cleavage of amyloid precursor protein (APP) by BACE1 to generate amyloid-beta peptide (Abeta). However, the molecular mechanisms underlying this effect remain to be elucidated. Cholesterol dependency of beta cleavage prompted us to analyze immunoisolated APP-containing detergent-resistant membranes from rodent brains. We found syntaxin 1 as a key molecule for activity-dependent regulation of APP processing in cholesterol-dependent microdomains. In living cells, APP associates with syntaxin 1-containing microdomains through X11-Munc18, which inhibits the APP-BACE1 interaction and beta cleavage via microdomain segregation. Phosphorylation of Munc18 by cdk5 causes a shift of APP to BACE1-containing microdomains. Neuronal hyperactivity, implicated in Abeta overproduction, promotes the switching of APP microdomain association as well as beta cleavage in a partially cdk5-dependent manner. We propose that microdomain switching is a mechanism of cholesterol- and activity-dependent regulation of APP processing in neurons.

Number:  289
UID:  18842420
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  Several BACE-1 inhibitors with low nanomolar level activities, encompassing a statine-based core structure with phenyloxymethyl- and benzyloxymethyl residues in the P1 position, are presented. The novel P1 modification introduced to allow the facile exploration of the S1 binding pocket of BACE-1, delivered highly promising inhibitors.

Number:  290
UID:  18812194
Founded words:  ['functions', 'function', 'function', 'functions']
Abstract:  Natural antisense transcripts and overlapping sense transcripts are expressed in a variety of tissues, including adult mouse brain. Here we show that a subset of mRNA-like sense-antisense transcript pairs are co-expressed within synaptoneurosomes of adult mouse forebrain, a subcellular fraction that is enriched in pinched-off dendritic spines of pyramidal neurons. Several of these pairs involve mRNAs that have been implicated in synaptic functions and in Alzheimer disease pathways. This study provides evidence that a new class of noncoding RNAs (natural antisense transcripts) are expressed near synapses, and encourages further studies of their roles in neuronal function.

Number:  291
UID:  18798280
Founded words:  ['activated', 'activated', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  BACE1 initiates processing of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) in the production of amyloid beta (Abeta) peptide. After beta-cleavage by BACE1, the C-terminal stub of the APP fragment is further processed by the gamma-secretase complex to produce Abeta. Because APP, Abeta, the gamma-secretase complex, and BACE1 are found in lipid raft membranes, Abeta production is widely accepted to occur in lipid rafts. However, whether BACE1 is activated within the rafts is unclear. To analyze the relationship between the activity and the localization of BACE1, we used a new BACE1 inhibitor, KMI-574, and separated raft membranes on sucrose density gradients. In the presence of KMI-574, the localization of BACE1 shifted from the rafts to nonraft membranes in HEK293 cells. We also analyzed the proteolytically inactive mutants, D93A, D289A, and D93A/D289A, of BACE1. These mutants also moved from rafts to nonrafts, and the D93A/D289A double-mutant localized exclusively to nonraft membranes. The mutants were defective in maturation by glynosylation and formed hyperoligomers, suggesting that the BACE1 oligomers could not exit from the ER and be transported to the Golgi apparatus. Our findings suggest that the activated conformation of BACE1 is important for protein transport and localization to lipid rafts.

Number:  292
UID:  18790604
Founded words:  ['associated', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Decreased muscarinic M1 receptor (CHRM1) mRNA has been reported in Brodmann's area (BA) 6 from subjects with schizophrenia. We have extended this study by measuring levels of CHRM1 ([(3)H]pirenzepine binding), CHRM3 ([(3)H]4-DAMP binding), the transcription factor SP1 and the CHRM1 downstream target beta-site APP-cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) in BA 6 from 19 subjects with schizophrenia and 19 control subjects. Radioligand binding was quantified using either in situ radioligand binding with autoradiography or, in cohorts of 10 control subjects and 10 subjects with schizophrenia, membrane enriched fraction (MEF) CNS ([(3)H]pirenzepine binding only). Levels of SP1 and BACE1 were measured by Western blotting. [(3)H]pirenzepine binding to tissue sections was in two layers, binding to tissue sections (Binding layer 1: p<0.01; Binding layer 2: p<0.001) and MEF (p<0.05) were decreased in schizophrenia. Levels of [(3)H]4-DAMP binding, SP1 and BACE1 were not altered in subjects with the disorder. This study shows a decrease in levels of CHRM1 in BA 6 from subjects with schizophrenia; as CHRM1 and BA 6 are important in maintaining normal cognitive function, these data support the hypothesis that decreased levels of cortical CHRM1 may contribute to the cognitive deficits associated with schizophrenia. Our findings on BACE1 suggest that the schizophrenia phenotype reported in BACE(-/-) mice is not simply due to lack of that protein in the cortex.

Number:  293
UID:  18660751
Founded words:  ['regulation', 'regulation']
Abstract:  We have recently identified a new form of post-translational regulation of BACE1 (beta-site amyloid precursor protein (APP)-cleaving enzyme 1), a membrane protein that acts as the rate-limiting enzyme in the generation of the Alzheimer disease amyloid beta-peptide (Abeta). Specifically, BACE1 is transiently acetylated on seven lysine residues in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum/endoplasmic reticulum-Golgi intermediate compartment (ER/ERGIC). The acetylated intermediates of the nascent protein are able to reach the Golgi apparatus, whereas the non-acetylated ones are retained and degraded in a post-ER compartment. Here, we report that the serine protease PCSK9 (proprotein convertase subtilisin kexin type 9) contributes to the disposal of non-acetylated BACE1. Both overexpression and small interfering RNA-mediated downregulation of PCSK9 affected the levels of BACE1. The downregulation of PCSK9 affected the levels of the loss-of-acetylation mutants (BACE1(Ala) and BACE1(Arg)) but not those of the gain-of-acetylation mutant (BACE1(Gln)). In addition, Pcsk9(-/-) mice showed increased levels of BACE1 and Abeta in the brain. Finally, we found that nascent low-density lipoprotein receptor, a known substrate of PCSK9, is also acetylated.

Number:  294
UID:  18655784
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  In this report we describe a novel radioligand, [(3)H](S)-2-((S)-3-Acetylamino-3-sec-butyl-2-oxo-pyrrolidin-1-yl)-N-[(1S,2R)-1-benzyl-2-hydroxy-3-(3-methoxy-benzylamino)-propyl]-4-phenyl-butyramide ([(3)H]BMS-599240), that exhibits robust specific binding in homogenates from cell cultures overexpressing beta-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme-1 (BACE1). Radioligand binding exhibited high affinity, K(d)=2 nM, commensurate with its inhibitory potency against BACE1. Inhibition of radioligand binding in the presence of a range of different BACE1 inhibitors exhibited the same rank order of potency as for inhibition of BACE1 enzymatic activity. BACE1-dependent binding of the radioligand was also demonstrated in mouse brain homogenates, where genetic ablation of BACE1 eliminated high affinity binding. Thus, the radioligand [(3)H]BMS-599240 is a novel tool potentially useful for evaluation of BACE1 enzyme in biological samples, and for evaluation of inhibitor binding to BACE1.

Number:  295
UID:  18650447
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activation', 'associated', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Differentiation of monocytes into macrophages is accompanied by increased cell adhesiveness, due in part to the activation of alpha4beta1 integrins. Here we report that the sustained alpha4beta1 activation associated with macrophage differentiation results from expression of beta1 integrin subunits that lack alpha2-6-linked sialic acids, a carbohydrate modification added by the ST6Gal-I sialyltransferase. During differentiation of U937 monocytic cells and primary human CD14(+) monocytes, ST6Gal-I is down-regulated, leading to beta1 hyposialylation and enhanced alpha4beta1-dependent VCAM-1 binding. Importantly, ST6Gal-I down-regulation results from cleavage by the BACE1 secretase, which we show is dramatically up-regulated during macrophage differentiation. BACE1 up-regulation, ST6Gal-I shedding, beta1 hyposialylation, and alpha4beta1-dependent VCAM-1 binding are all temporally correlated and share the same signaling mechanism (protein kinase C/Ras/ERK). Preventing ST6Gal-I down-regulation (and therefore integrin hyposialylation), through BACE1 inhibition or ST6Gal-I constitutive overexpression, eliminates VCAM-1 binding. Similarly, preventing integrin hyposialylation inhibits a differentiation-induced increase in the expression of an activation-dependent conformational epitope on the beta1 subunit. Collectively, these results describe a novel mechanism for alpha4beta1 regulation and further suggest an unanticipated role for BACE1 in macrophage function.

Number:  296
UID:  18468890
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interactions', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  Guided by structure-based design, we synthesized two novel series of potent inhibitors of BACE1 and generated extensive SAR around both the prime and non-prime side binding pockets. The key feature of both series is a cyclic amine motif specifically crafted to achieve interactions with both the flap and with the S2' pocket.

Number:  297
UID:  18387811
Founded words:  ['interact', 'interact', 'binding', 'binding', 'regulate']
Abstract:  The study of Amyloid Precursor Protein (APP) processing has been the focus of considerable interest, since it leads to Abeta peptide generation, the main constituent of neuritic plaques found in brains of Alzheimer's disease patients. Therefore, the identification of novel APP binding partners that regulate Abeta peptide production represents a pharmaceutical target aiming at reducing Alphabeta pathology. In this study, we provide evidence that Homer2 and Homer3 but not Homer1 proteins interact specifically with APP. Their expression inhibits APP processing and reduces secretion of Abeta peptides. In addition, they decrease the levels of cell surface APP and inhibit maturation of APP and beta-secretase (BACE1). The effects of Homer2 and Homer3 on APP trafficking to the cell surface and/or on APP and BACE1 maturation could be part of the mechanism by which the expression of these proteins leads to the significant reduction of Abeta peptide production.

Number:  298
UID:  18378702
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activated', 'binding', 'binding', 'regulation', 'regulation']
Abstract:  BACE1 (beta-secretase) is a transmembrane aspartic protease that cleaves the beta-amyloid precursor protein and generates the amyloid beta peptide (Abeta). BACE1 cycles between the cell surface and the endosomal system many times and becomes activated interconvertibly during its cellular trafficking, leading to the production of Abeta. Here we report the crystal structure of the catalytically active form of BACE1. The active form has novel structural features involving the conformation of the flap and subsites that promote substrate binding. The functionally essential residues and water molecules are well defined and play a key role in the iterative activation of BACE1. We further describe the crystal structure of the dehydrated form of BACE1, showing that BACE1 activity is dependent on the dynamics of a catalytically required Asp-bound water molecule, which directly affects its catalytic properties. These findings provide insight into a novel regulation of BACE1 activity and elucidate how BACE1 modulates its activity during cellular trafficking.

Number:  299
UID:  18374657
Founded words:  ['interact', 'interact']
Abstract:  Cleavage of APP by BACE is the first proteolytic step in the production of Amyloid beta (Abeta, which accumulates in senile plaques in Alzheimer's disease. BACE-cleavage of APP is thought to happen in endosomes. However, there are controversial data whether APP and BACE can already interact on the cell surface dependent on the cholesterol level. To examine whether APP and BACE come into close proximity on the cell surface in living cells, we employed a novel technique by combining time-resolved Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) measurements with total internal reflection microscopy (TIRET microscopy). Our data indicate that BACE and APP come into close proximity within the cell, but probably not on the cell surface. To analyze the impact of alterations in cholesterol level upon BACE-cleavage, we measured sAPP secretion. Alteration of APP processing and BACE proximity by cholesterol might be explained by alterations in cell membrane fluidity.

Number:  300
UID:  18365688
Founded words:  ['bind', 'bind', 'regulatory']
Abstract:  In the course of screening for anti-dementia agents from natural products, two beta-secretase (BACE1) inhibitors were isolated from the methanolic extract of Perilla frutescens var. acuta and identified as luteolin (1) and rosmarinic acid (2) with IC50 values of 5.0 x 10(-7) M and 2.1 x 10(-5) M, respectively. They inhibited BACE1 in a non-competitive manner with a substrate in Dixon plots, suggesting that they might bind to either beta-secretase subsite or to another regulatory site. Kivalues of 1 and 2 were 6.2 x 10(-5) M and 3.9 x 10(-5) M, respectively. They were less inhibitory against other enzymes such as alpha-secretase (TACE), acetylcholine esterase (AchE), chymotrypsin, and elastase, indicating that they were relatively specific inhibitors of BACE1.

Number:  301
UID:  18341989
Founded words:  ['activator', 'activator', 'interacts', 'interacts']
Abstract:  Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (cdk5) has been implicated in Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathogenesis. Here, we demonstrate that overexpression of p25, an activator of cdk5, led to increased levels of BACE1 mRNA and protein in vitro and in vivo. A p25/cdk5 responsive region containing multiple sites for signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT1/3) was identified in the BACE1 promoter. STAT3 interacts with the BACE1 promoter, and p25-overexpressing mice had elevated levels of pSTAT3 and BACE1, whereas cdk5-deficient mice had reduced levels. Furthermore, mice with a targeted mutation in the STAT3 cdk5 responsive site had lower levels of BACE1. Increased BACE levels in p25 overexpressing mice correlated with enhanced amyloidogenic processing that could be reversed by a cdk5 inhibitor. These data demonstrate a pathway by which p25/cdk5 increases the amyloidogenic processing of APP through STAT3-mediated transcriptional control of BACE1 that could have implications for AD pathogenesis.

Number:  302
UID:  18326038
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activation', 'activation', 'activation', 'activation']
Abstract:  Perioperative factors including hypoxia, hypocapnia, and certain anesthetics have been suggested to contribute to Alzheimer disease (AD) neuropathogenesis. Desflurane is one of the most commonly used inhalation anesthetics. However, the effects of desflurane on AD neuropathogenesis have not been previously determined. Here, we set out to assess the effects of desflurane and hypoxia on caspase activation, amyloid precursor protein (APP) processing, and amyloid beta-protein (Abeta) generation in H4 human neuroglioma cells (H4 naïve cells) as well as those overexpressing APP (H4-APP cells). Neither 12% desflurane nor hypoxia (18% O(2)) alone affected caspase-3 activation, APP processing, and Abeta generation. However, treatment with a combination of 12% desflurane and hypoxia (18% O(2)) (desflurane/hypoxia) for 6 h induced caspase-3 activation, altered APP processing, and increased Abeta generation in H4-APP cells. Desflurane/hypoxia also increased levels of beta-site APP-cleaving enzyme in H4-APP cells. In addition, desflurane/hypoxia-induced Abeta generation could be reduced by the broad caspase inhibitor benzyloxycarbonyl-VAD. Finally, the Abeta aggregation inhibitor clioquinol and gamma-secretase inhibitor L-685,458 attenuated caspase-3 activation induced by desflurane/hypoxia. In summary, desflurane can induce Abeta production and caspase activation, but only in the presence of hypoxia. Pending in vivo confirmation, these data may have profound implications for anesthesia care in elderly patients, and especially those with AD.

Number:  303
UID:  18255190
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activation', 'regulator', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulated']
Abstract:  The activity of beta-secretase (BACE1), the endo-protease essential for the production of amyloid beta (Abeta) peptides, is increased in brain of late-onset sporadic Alzheimer's disease (AD), and oxidative stress is the potential cause of this event. Oxidative stress up-regulates the expression and the activity of BACE1 in cellular and animal models, through a mechanism that involves the increase of gamma-secretase cleavage on APP and the activation of c-jun N-terminal kinase/activator protein 1 (JNK/AP1) pathway. We further characterized the cellular pathways that control BACE1 expression under oxidative stress. We investigated the involvement of extracellular signal regulated MAP kinase (ERK1/2) pathway in the regulation of BACE1 expression, since it has been recently shown that ERK1/2 is an endogenous regulator of the gamma-secretase activity. We found that ERK1/2 pathway negatively modulates BACE1 expression and activity. Moreover, we observed that conditions that abrogate the gamma-secretase activity favor the activation of signalling pathways that promote cell survival, such as ERK1/2 and the serine/threonine kinase Akt/protein kinase B (Akt). These data suggest that the positive or negative cellular responses to oxidative stress parallel the activities of the beta- and the gamma-secretase. ERK1/2 and JNK pathways are involved in this bipartite response, which can lead to neurodegeneration or neuroprotection depending on the cellular and environmental conditions or cooperation with other signalling pathways such as Akt cascade.

Number:  304
UID:  18226904
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binds', 'binding']
Abstract:  Fragment screening revealed that tyramine binds to the active site of the Alzheimer's disease drug target BACE-1. Hit expansion by selection of compounds from the Roche compound library identified tyramine derivatives with improved binding affinities as monitored by surface plasmon resonance. X-ray structures show that the amine of the tyramine fragment hydrogen-bonds to the catalytic water molecule. Structure-guided ligand design led to the synthesis of further low molecular weight compounds that are starting points for chemical leads.

Number:  305
UID:  18182389
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interacted', 'interactions', 'interacted', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'mediated', 'complexes']
Abstract:  We found previously by fluorescence resonance energy transfer experiments that amyloid precursor protein (APP) homodimerizes in living cells. APP homodimerization is likely to be mediated by two sites of the ectodomain and a third site within the transmembrane sequence of APP. We have now investigated the role of the N-terminal growth factor-like domain in APP dimerization by NMR, biochemical, and cell biological approaches. Under nonreducing conditions, the N-terminal domain of APP formed SDS-labile and SDS-stable complexes. The presence of SDS was sufficient to convert native APP dimers entirely into monomers. Addition of an excess of a synthetic peptide (APP residues 91-116) containing the disulfide bridge-stabilized loop inhibited cross-linking of pre-existing SDS-labile APP ectodomain dimers. Surface plasmon resonance analysis revealed that this peptide specifically bound to the N-terminal domain of APP and that binding was entirely dependent on the oxidation of the thiol groups. By solution-state NMR we detected small chemical shift changes indicating that the loop peptide interacted with a large protein surface rather than binding to a defined pocket. Finally, we studied the effect of the loop peptide added to the medium of living cells. Whereas the levels of alpha-secretory APP increased, soluble beta-cleaved APP levels decreased. Because Abeta40 and Abeta42 decreased to similar levels as soluble beta-cleaved APP, we conclude either that beta-secretase binding to APP was impaired or that the peptide allosterically affected APP processing. We suggest that APP acquires a loop-mediated homodimeric state that is further stabilized by interactions of hydrophobic residues of neighboring domains.

Number:  306
UID:  18163181
Founded words:  ['function', 'function']
Abstract:  Down syndrome (DS) is the most common human chromosomal abnormality caused by an extra copy of chromosome 21. The phenotype of DS is thought to result from overexpression of a gene or genes located on the triplicated chromosome or chromosome region. Several reports have shown that the neuropathology of DS comprises developmental abnormalities and Alzheimer-like lesions such as senile plaques. A key component of senile plaques is amyloid beta-peptide which is generated from the amyloid precursor protein (APP) by sequential action of beta-secretases (BACE1 and BACE2) and gamma-secretase. While BACE1 maps to chromosome 11, APP and BACE2 are located on chromosome 21. To challenge the gene dosage effect and gain insight into the expressional relation between beta-secretases and APP in DS brain, we evaluated protein expression levels of BACE1, BACE2 and APP in fetal and adult DS brain compared to controls. In fetal brain, protein expression levels of BACE2 and APP were comparable between DS and controls. BACE1 was increased, but did not reach statistical significance. In adult brain, BACE1 and BACE2 were comparable between DS and controls, but APP was significantly increased. We conclude that APP overexpression seems to be absent during the development of DS brain up to 18-19 weeks of gestational age. However, its overexpression in adult DS brain could lead to disturbance of normal function of APP contributing to neurodegeneration. Comparable expression of BACE1 and BACE2 speaks against the hypothesis that increased beta-secretase results in (or even underlies) increased production of amyloidogenic A beta fragments. Furthermore, current data indicate that the DS phenotype cannot be fully explained by simple gene dosage effect.

Number:  307
UID:  17986385
Founded words:  ['regulation', 'regulation']
Abstract:  Retinoic acid stimulates alpha-secretase processing of amyloid precursor protein (APP) and decreases beta-secretase cleavage that leads to amyloid-beta formation. Here, we investigated the effect of retinoic acid on the two putative alpha-secretases, the disintegrin metalloproteinases ADAM10 and TACE, and the beta-site cleaving enzyme BACE1, in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells. Western blot analysis showed that exposure to retinoic acid resulted in significantly increased levels of ADAM10 and TACE, suggesting that regulation of alpha-secretases causes the effects on APP processing. The presence of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitor LY 294002 selectively reduced the effect on ADAM10 protein levels but not on ADAM10 mRNA levels as determined by RT-PCR. On the other hand, the effect on TACE was shown to be dependent on protein kinase C, since it was completely blocked in the presence of the inhibitor bisindolylmaleimide XI. Our data indicate that different signalling pathways are involved in retinoic acid-induced up-regulation of the secretases.

Number:  308
UID:  17897958
Founded words:  ['regulatory']
Abstract:  BACE1 (beta-site amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzyme-1) is a membrane-bound aspartic protease that cleaves amyloid precursor protein to produce a neurotoxic peptide, amyloid beta-peptide, and has been implicated in triggering the pathogenesis of Alzheimer disease. We showed previously that BACE1 cleaves beta-galactoside alpha2,6-sialyltransferase I (ST6Gal I) to initiate its secretion, but it remained unclear how BACE1 affects the cellular level of alpha2,6-sialylation. Here, we found that BACE1 overexpression in Hep3B cells increased the sialylation of soluble secreted glycoproteins, but did not affect cell-surface sialylation. The sialylation of soluble glycoproteins was not increased by ST6Gal I overexpression alone, but was increased by co-overexpression of ST6Gal I and BACE1 or by expression of the soluble form of ST6Gal I, suggesting that soluble ST6Gal I produced by BACE1 plays, at least in part, a role in the sialylation of soluble glycoproteins. We also found that plasma glycoproteins from BACE1-deficient mice exhibited reduced levels of alpha2,6-sialylation compared with those from wild-type mice. We propose a novel regulatory mechanism in which cleavage and secretion of ST6Gal I enhance the sialylation of soluble glycoprotein substrates.

Number:  309
UID:  17764014
Founded words:  ['associate', 'associate', 'associate', 'binding', 'binds', 'binding']
Abstract:  Increased amyloid-beta precursor protein (A beta PP) and amyloid-beta (A beta) accumulation appear to be upstream steps in the pathogenesis of sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM). BACE1, participating in A beta production is also increased in s-IBM muscle fibers. Nogo-B and Nogo-A belong to a family of integral membrane reticulons, and Nogo-B binding to BACE1 blocks BACE1 access to A beta PP, decreasing A beta production. We studied Nogo-B and Nogo-A in s-IBM muscle and in our IBM muscle culture models, based on A beta PP-overexpression or ER-stress-induction in cultured human muscle fibers (CHMFs). We report that: (1) in biopsied s-IBM fibers, Nogo-B is increased, accumulates in aggregates, is immuno-co-localized with BACE1, and binds to BACE1; Nogo-A is undetectable. (2) In CHMFs, (a) A beta PP overexpression increases Nogo-B, Nogo-A, and BACE1, (b) ER stress increases BACE1 but decreases Nogo-B and Nogo-A, (c) Nogo-B and Nogo-A associate with BACE1. Accordingly, two novel mechanisms, A beta PP overexpression and ER stress, are involved in Nogo-B and Nogo-A expression in human muscle. We propose that in s-IBM muscle the Nogo-B increase may represent an attempt by muscle fiber to decrease A beta production. However, the increase of Nogo-B seems insufficient because A beta continues to accumulate and the disease progresses. We propose that manipulations, which increase Nogo-B in s-IBM muscle might offer a new therapeutic opportunity.

Number:  310
UID:  17650113
Founded words:  ['activator', 'regulate']
Abstract:  The beta amyloid (Abeta) cascade has been at the forefront of the hypothesis used to describe the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). It is generally accepted that drugs that can regulate the processing of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) toward the non-amyloidogenic pathway may have a therapeutic potential. Previous studies have shown that protein kinase C (PKC) hypofunction has an important role in AD pathophysiology. Therefore, the effects of a new PKC activator, alpha-APP modulator [(2S,5S)-(E,E)-8-(5-(4-(trifluoromethyl)phenyl)-2,4-pentadienoylamino)benzolactam (TPPB)], on APP processing were investigated. Using PC12 cells and SH-SY5Y(APP695) cells, it was found that TPPB promoted the secretion of sAPPalpha without affecting full-length expression of APP. The increase in sAPPalpha by TPPB was blocked by inhibitors of PKC, extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and tyrosine kinase, suggesting the involvement of these signal transduction pathways. TPPB increased alpha-secretase activity [a disintegrin and metalloproteinase (ADAM)10 and 17], as shown by direct fluorescence activity detection and Western blot analysis. TPPB-induced sAPPalpha release was blocked by the metalloproteinase inhibitor TAPI-2, furin inhibitor CMK and by the protein-trafficking inhibitor brefeldin. The results also showed that TPPB decreased beta-secretase activity, Abeta40 release and beta site APP-cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) expression, but did not significantly affect neprilysin (NEP) and insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE) expression. Our data indicate that TPPB could direct APP processing towards the non-amyloidogenic pathway by increasing alpha-secretase activity, and suggest its therapeutic potential in AD.

Number:  311
UID:  17566645
Founded words:  ['regulated', 'regulated', 'regulated', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Although alterations in the function of the neurotransmitter system have been implicated in the pathology of Alzheimer's disease (AD), the mechanisms that underlie this pathological change are not well understood. Beta-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) is a key protease in the generation of beta-amyloid, an important trigger protein in the pathogenesis of AD. The expression and activity of BACE1 are increased in the brains of sporadic AD patients, and a role for BACE1 in neurotransmission has been suggested recently. This study examines whether BACE1 plays a role in regulated exocytosis in PC12 cells. Treatment of PC12 cells with a beta-secretase inhibitor reduced stimulus-dependent secretion of neurotransmitters, suggesting a potential role of BACE1 in regulated exocytosis. Using transfected human growth hormone as a reporter for a regulated secretory pathway in PC12 cells, we found that the transient overexpression of BACE1 increased basal secretion in the absence of a stimulus and reduced stimulus-dependent secretion in intact PC12 cells. In digitonin-permeabilized PC12 cells, an overexpression of BACE1 enhanced the Ca2+-independent and ATP-independent component of the secretory pathway. Furthermore, expression of the glycosylation-deficient mutant of BACE1, BACE1N354Q, led to an elevation of basal secretions over that by BACE1 wild-type, suggesting a role of BACE1 glycosylation in basal secretion. These results demonstrate an unknown role for BACE1 in secretion, and suggest that elevated levels of BACE1 in AD brains may contribute to the altered neurotransmitter pathology of AD through stimulation of spontaneous basal secretion under resting conditions.

Number:  312
UID:  17542811
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  Amyloid beta-peptide (Abeta) is implicated as the major causative agent in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Abeta is produced by the processing of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) by BACE1 (beta-secretase) and gamma-secretase. Many inhibitors have been developed for the secretases. However, the inhibitors will interfere with the processing of not only APP but also of other secretase substrates. In this study, we describe the development of inhibitors that prevent production of Abeta by specific binding to the beta-cleavage site of APP. We used the hydropathic complementarity (HC) approach for the design of short peptide inhibitors. Some of the HC peptides were bound to the substrate peptide (Sub W) corresponding to the beta-cleavage site of APP and blocked its cleavage by recombinant human BACE1 (rhBACE1) in vitro. In addition, HC peptides specifically inhibited the cleavage of Sub W, and not affecting other BACE1 substrates. Chemical modification allowed an HC peptide (CIQIHF) to inhibit the processing of APP as well as the production of Abeta in the treated cells. Such novel APP-specific inhibitors will provide opportunity for the development of drugs that can be used for the prevention and treatment of AD with minimal side effects.

Number:  313
UID:  17463224
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interacts', 'interaction', 'interacts']
Abstract:  The major defining pathological hallmark of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the accumulation of amyloid beta protein (Abeta), a small peptide derived from beta- and gamma-secretase cleavages of the amyloid precursor protein (APP). Recent studies have shown that beta- and gamma-secretase activities of BACE1 and presenilin, respectively, are concentrated in intracellular lipid raft microdomains. However, the manner in which APP normally traffics to lipid rafts is unknown. In this study, using transient transfection and immuno-precipitation assays, we show that the cytoplasmic domain of low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP) interacts with APP and increases Abeta secretion and APP beta-CTF (C-terminal fragment) generation by promoting BACE1-APP interaction. We also employed discontinuous sucrose density gradient ultracentrifugation to show that the LRP cytoplasmic domain-mediated effect was accompanied by greatly increased localization of APP and BACE1 to lipid raft membranes, where beta- and gamma-secretase activities are highly enriched. Moreover, we provide evidence that endogenous LRP is required for the normal delivery of APP to lipid rafts and Abeta generation primarily in the endocytic but not secretory pathway. These results may provide novel insights to block Abeta generation by targeting LRP-mediated delivery of APP to raft microdomains.

Number:  314
UID:  17439957
Founded words:  ['regulatory', 'regulated']
Abstract:  BACE1 is the protease responsible for the production of amyloid-beta peptides that accumulate in the brain of Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients. BACE1 expression is regulated at the transcriptional, as well as post-transcriptional level. Very high BACE1 mRNA levels have been observed in pancreas, but the protein and activity were found mainly in brain. An up-regulation of the protein has been described in some AD patients without a change in transcript levels. The features of BACE1 5' untranslated region (5' UTR), such as the length, GC content, evolutionary conservation and presence of upstream AUGs (uAUGs), indicate an important regulatory role of this 5' UTR in translational control. We demonstrate that, in brain and pancreas, almost all of the native BACE1 mRNA contains the full-length 5' UTR. RNA transfection and in vitro translation show that translation is mainly inhibited by the presence of the uAUGs. We provide a mutational analysis that highlight the second uAUG as the main inhibitory element while mutations of all four uAUGs fully de-repress translation. Furthermore, we have evidence that a sequence within the region 222-323 of the BACE1 5' UTR has a stimulatory effect on translation that might depend on the presence of trans-acting factors.

Number:  315
UID:  17425515
Founded words:  ['mediated', 'regulates']
Abstract:  The lipid second messenger ceramide regulates the rate of beta cleavage of the Alzheimer's disease APP (amyloid precursor protein) by affecting the molecular stability of the beta secretase BACE1 (beta-site APP cleaving enzyme 1). Such an event is stimulated in the brain by the normal process of aging, and is under the control of the general aging programme mediated by the insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor. In the present study we report that BACE1 is acetylated on seven lysine residues of the N-terminal portion of the nascent protein. This process involves lysine acetylation in the lumen of the ER (endoplasmic reticulum) and is followed by deacetylation in the lumen of the Golgi apparatus, once the protein is fully mature. We also show that specific enzymatic activities acetylate (in the ER) and deacetylate (in the Golgi apparatus) the lysine residues. This process requires carrier-mediated translocation of acetyl-CoA into the ER lumen and is stimulated by ceramide. Site-directed mutagenesis indicates that lysine acetylation is necessary for nascent BACE1 to leave the ER and move ahead in the secretory pathway, and for the molecular stabilization of the protein.

Number:  316
UID:  17385716
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activation', 'activator', 'activated', 'activated', 'activated', 'activated', 'associated', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'regulation', 'regulation']
Abstract:  The brains of Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients display cerebrovascular and parenchymal deposits of beta-amyloid (A beta) peptides, which are derived by proteolytic processing by the beta-site APP-cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) of the amyloid precursor protein (APP). The rat BACE1 promoter has a nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) binding site. Deletion studies with a BACE1 promoter/luciferase reporter suggest that the NF-kappaB binding DNA consensus sequence plays a suppressor role, when occupied by NF-kappaB, in the regulation of neuronal brain BACE1 expression. Here we characterize a signal transduction pathway that may be responsible for the increases in A beta associated with AD. We propose that the transcription factor NF-kappaB acts as a repressor in neurons but as an activator of BACE1 transcription in activated astrocytes present in the CNS under chronic stress, a feature present in the AD brain. The activated astrocytic stimulation of BACE1 may in part account for increased BACE1 transcription and subsequent processing of Ab eta in a cell-specific manner in the aged and AD brain. As measured by reporter gene promoter constructs and endogenous BACE1 protein expression, a functional NF-kappaB site was stimulatory in activated astrocytes and A beta-exposed neuronal cells and repressive in neuronal and nonactivated astrocytic cells. Given the evidence for increased levels of activated astrocytes in the aged brain, the age- and AD-associated increases in NF-kappaB in brain may be significant contributors to increases in A beta, acting as a positive feedback loop of chronic inflammation, astrocyte activation, increased p65/p50 activation of BACE1 transcription, and further inflammation.

Number:  317
UID:  17315857
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interactions', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  Fragment-based lead discovery has been successfully applied to the aspartyl protease enzyme beta-secretase (BACE-1). Fragment hits that contained an aminopyridine motif binding to the two catalytic aspartic acid residues in the active site of the enzyme were the chemical starting points. Structure-based design approaches have led to identification of low micromolar lead compounds that retain these interactions and additionally occupy adjacent hydrophobic pockets of the active site. These leads form two subseries, for which compounds 4 (IC50 = 25 microM) and 6c (IC50 = 24 microM) are representative. In the latter series, further optimization has led to 8a (IC50 = 690 nM).

Number:  318
UID:  17315856
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  This paper describes an application of fragment screening to the aspartyl protease enzyme, beta-secretase (BACE-1), using high throughput X-ray crystallography. Three distinct chemotypes were identified by X-ray crystallography as binding to the catalytic aspartates either via an aminoheterocycle (such as 2-aminoquinoline), a piperidine, or an aliphatic hydroxyl group. The fragment hits were weak inhibitors of BACE-1 in the millimolar range but were of interest because most of them displayed relatively good ligand efficiencies. The aminoheterocycles exhibited a novel recognition motif that has not been seen before with aspartic proteases. Virtual screening around this motif identified an aminopyridine with increased potency and attractive growth points for further elaboration using structure-based drug design. The companion paper illustrates how sub-micromolar inhibitors were developed starting from this fragment.

Number:  319
UID:  17306421
Founded words:  ['associated', 'mediated', 'regulation', 'regulation']
Abstract:  Cerebral amyloid angiopathy, associated to most cases of Alzheimer's disease (AD), is characterized by the deposition of amyloid ss-peptide (Ass) in brain vessels, although the origin of the vascular amyloid deposits is still controversial: neuronal versus vascular. In the present work, we demonstrate that primary cultures of human cerebral vascular smooth muscle cells (HC-VSMCs) have all the secretases involved in amyloid ss-protein precursor (APP) cleavage and produce Ass(1-40) and Ass(1-42). Oxidative stress, a key factor in the etiology and pathophysiology of AD, up-regulates ss-site APP cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) expression, as well as Ass(1-40) and Ass(1-42) secretion in HC-VSMCs. This process is mediated by c-Jun N-terminal Kinase and p38 MAPK signaling and appears restricted to BACE1 regulation as no changes in the other secretases were observed. In conclusion, oxidative stress-mediated up-regulation of the amyloidogenic pathway in human cerebral vascular smooth muscle cells may contribute to the overall cerebrovascular amyloid angiopathy observed in AD patients.

Number:  320
UID:  17303576
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'mediated']
Abstract:  The incidence of Alzheimer disease (AD) and vascular dementia is greatly increased following cerebral ischemia and stroke in which hypoxic conditions occur in affected brain areas. beta-Amyloid peptide (Abeta), which is derived from the beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP) by sequential proteolytic cleavages from beta-secretase (BACE1) and presenilin-1 (PS1)/gamma-secretase, is widely believed to trigger a cascade of pathological events culminating in AD and vascular dementia. However, a direct molecular link between hypoxic insults and APP processing has yet to be established. Here, we demonstrate that acute hypoxia increases the expression and the enzymatic activity of BACE1 by up-regulating the level of BACE1 mRNA, resulting in increases in the APP C-terminal fragment-beta (betaCTF) and Abeta. Hypoxia has no effect on the level of PS1, APP, and tumor necrosis factor-alpha-converting enzyme (TACE, an enzyme known to cleave APP at the alpha-secretase cleavage site). Sequence analysis, mutagenesis, and gel shift studies revealed binding of HIF-1 to the BACE1 promoter. Overexpression of HIF-1alpha increases BACE1 mRNA and protein level, whereas down-regulation of HIF-1alpha reduced the level of BACE1. Hypoxic treatment fails to further potentiate the stimulatory effect of HIF-1alpha overexpression on BACE1 expression, suggesting that hypoxic induction of BACE1 expression is primarily mediated by HIF-1alpha. Finally, we observed significant reduction in BACE1 protein levels in the hippocampus and the cortex of HIF-1alpha conditional knock-out mice. Our results demonstrate an important role for hypoxia/HIF-1alpha in modulating the amyloidogenic processing of APP and provide a molecular mechanism for increased incidence of AD following cerebral ischemic and stroke injuries.

Number:  321
UID:  17241154
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interacting', 'interact', 'interactions', 'interacting', 'interact', 'bind', 'binds', 'bind', 'mediating', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  Proteolytic processing of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) is modulated by the action of enzymes alpha-, beta- and gamma-secretases, with the latter two mediating the amyloidogenic production of amyloid-beta (Abeta). Cellular modulators of APP processing are well known from studies of genetic mutations (such as those found in APP and presenilins) or polymorphisms (such as the apolipoprotein E4 epsilon-allele) that predisposes an individual to early or late-onset Alzheimer's disease. In recent years, several classes of molecule with modulating functions in APP processing and Abeta secretion have emerged. These include the neuronal Munc-18 interacting proteins (Mints)/X11s, members of the reticulon family (RTN-3 and RTN-4/Nogo-B), the Nogo-66 receptor (NgR), the peptidyl-prolyl isomerase Pin1 and the Rho family GTPases and their effectors. Mints and NgR bind to APP directly, while RTN3 and Nogo-B interact with the beta-secretase BACE1. Phosphorylated APP is a Pin1 substrate, which binds to its phosphor-Thr668-Pro motif. These interactions by and large resulted in a reduction of Abeta generation both in vitro and in vivo. Inhibition of Rho and Rho-kinase (ROCK) activity may underlie the ability of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and statins to reduce Abeta production, a feat which could also be achieved by Rac1 inhibition. Detailed understanding of the underlying mechanisms of action of these novel modulators of APP processing, as well as insights into the molecular neurological basis of how Abeta impairs leaning and memory, will open up multiple avenues for the therapeutic intervention of Alzheimer's disease.

Number:  322
UID:  17168646
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'binding', 'binding', 'complexity', 'regulation', 'regulatory', 'regulation', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Major hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease (AD) include brain deposition of the amyloid-beta peptide (Abeta), which is proteolytically cleaved from a large Abeta precursor protein (APP) by beta and gamma- secretases. A transmembrane aspartyl protease, beta-APP cleaving enzyme (BACE1), has been recognized as the beta-secretase. We review the structure and function of the BACE1 protein, and of 4129 bp of the 5'-flanking region sequence of the BACE1 gene and its interaction with various transcription factors involved in cell signaling. The promoter region and 5'-untranslated region (UTR) contain multiple transcription factor binding sites, such as AP-1, CREB and MEF2. A 91 bp fragment is the shortest region with significant reporter gene activity and constitutes the minimal promoter element for BACE1. The BACE1 promoter contains six unique functional domains and three structural domains of increasing sequence complexity as the "ATG" start codon is approached. Notably, the BACE1 gene promoter contains basal regulatory elements, inducible features and sites for regulation by various important transcription factors. Herein, we also discuss and speculate how the interaction of these transcription factors with the BACE1 promoter can modulate synaptic plasticity, neuronal apoptosis and oxidative stress, which are pertinent to the pathogenesis and progression of AD.

Number:  323
UID:  17151287
Founded words:  ['activated', 'interaction', 'interacts', 'interaction', 'interacts']
Abstract:  The beta-amyloid peptide (Abeta) is a major component of Alzheimer disease (AD)-associated senile plaques and is generated by sequential cleavage of the beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP) by beta-secretase (BACE1) and gamma-secretase. BACE1 cleaves APP at the N terminus of the Abeta domain, generating a membrane-bound C-terminal fragment (CTF-beta) that can be subsequently cleaved by gamma-secretase within the transmembrane domain to release Abeta. Because BACE1 initiates Abeta generation, it represents a potential target molecule to interfere with Abeta production in therapeutic strategies for AD. BACE1 interacts with Golgi-localized, gamma-ear-containing, ADP ribosylation factor-binding (GGA) proteins that are involved in the subcellular trafficking of BACE1. Here, we show that GGA1 is preferentially expressed in neurons of the human brain. GGA1 was also detected in activated microglia surrounding amyloid plaques in AD brains. Functional analyses with cultured cells demonstrate that GGA1 is implicated in the proteolytic processing of APP. Overexpression of GGA1 or a dominant-negative variant reduced cleavage of APP by BACE1 as indicated by a decrease in CTF-beta generation. Importantly, overexpression of GGA1 reduced, whereas RNAi-mediated suppression of GGA1 increased the secretion of Abeta. The modulation of APP processing by GGA1 is independent of a direct interaction of both proteins. Because total cellular activity of BACE1 was not affected by GGA1 expression, our data indicate that changes in the subcellular trafficking of BACE1 or other GGA1-dependent proteins contribute to changes in APP processing and Abeta generation. Thus, GGA proteins might be involved in the pathogenesis of AD.

Number:  324
UID:  17083447
Founded words:  ['activation']
Abstract:  Accumulation of amyloid beta peptide (Abeta) in brain is a hallmark of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Inhibition of beta-site amyloid precursor protein (APP)-cleaving enzyme-1 (BACE1), the enzyme that initiates Abeta production, and other Abeta-lowering strategies are commonly tested in transgenic mice overexpressing mutant APP. However, sporadic AD cases, which represent the majority of AD patients, are free from the mutation and do not necessarily have overproduction of APP. In addition, the commonly used Swedish mutant APP alters APP cleavage. Therefore, testing Abeta-lowering strategies in transgenic mice may not be optimal. In this study, we investigated the impact of BACE1 inhibition in non-transgenic mice with physiologically relevant APP expression. Existing Abeta ELISAs are either relatively insensitive to mouse Abeta or not specific to full-length Abeta. A newly developed ELISA detected a significant reduction of full-length soluble Abeta 1-40 in mice with the BACE1 homozygous gene deletion or BACE1 inhibitor treatment, while the level of x-40 Abeta was moderately reduced due to detection of non-full-length Abeta and compensatory activation of alpha-secretase. These results confirmed the feasibility of Abeta reduction through BACE1 inhibition under physiological conditions. Studies using our new ELISA in non-transgenic mice provide more accurate evaluation of Abeta-reducing strategies than was previously feasible.

Number:  325
UID:  17075903
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interacts', 'interaction', 'interacts', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulator', 'functioning', 'functioning', 'functioning']
Abstract:  One of the pathologic hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease is the excessive deposition of beta-amyloid peptides (Abeta) in senile plaques. Abeta is generated when beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP) is cleaved sequentially by beta-secretase, identified as beta-site APP-cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1), and gamma-secretase, a putative enzymatic complex containing presenilin 1 (PS1). However, functional interaction between PS1 and BACE1 has never been known. In addition to this classical role in the generation of Abeta peptides, it has also been proposed that PS1 affects the intracellular trafficking and maturation of selected membrane proteins. We show that the levels of exogenous and endogenous mature BACE1 expressed in presenilin-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts (PS-/-MEFs) were reduced significantly compared to those in wild-type MEFs. Moreover, the levels of mature BACE1 were increased in human neuroblastoma cell line, SH-SY5Y, stably expressing wild-type PS1, compared to native cells. Conversely, the maturation of BACE1 was compromised under the stable expression of dominant-negative mutant PS1 overexpression. Immunoprecipitation assay showed that PS1 preferably interacts with proBACE1 rather than mature BACE1, indicating that PS1 can be directly involved in the maturation process of BACE1. Further, endogenous PS1 was immunoprecipitated with endogenous BACE1 in SH-SY5Y cells and mouse brain tissue. We conclude that PS1 is directly involved in the maturation of BACE1, thus possibly functioning as a regulator of both beta- and gamma-secretase in Abeta generation.

Number:  326
UID:  16978875
Founded words:  ['association', 'regulating', 'regulating']
Abstract:  Proteolysis of beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP) into amyloid beta peptide (Abeta) by beta- and gamma-secretases is a critical step in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's Disease (AD), but the pathways regulating secretases are not fully characterized. Ubiquitinylation, which is dysregulated in AD, may affect APP processing. Here, we describe a screen for APP processing modulators using an siRNA library targeting 532 predicted ubiquitin ligases. Seven siRNA pools diminished Abeta production. Of these, siRNAs targeting PPIL2 (hCyp-60) suppressed beta-site cleavage. Knockdown of PPIL2 mRNA decreased BACE1 mRNA, while overexpression of PPIL2 cDNA enhanced BACE1 mRNA levels. Microarray analysis of PPIL2 or BACE1 knockdown indicated that genes affected by BACE1 knockdown are a subset of those dependent upon PPIL2; suggesting that BACE1 expression is downstream of PPIL2. The association of PPIL2 with BACE expression and its requirement for Abeta production suggests new approaches to discover disease modifying agents for AD.

Number:  327
UID:  16965550
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'interacted', 'association', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interacted', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulated', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Beta-secretase beta-site APP cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1), is a membrane-bound aspartyl protease necessary for the generation of amyloid beta-protein (Abeta), which accumulates in the brains of individuals with Alzheimer's disease (AD). To gain insight into the mechanisms by which BACE1 activity is regulated, we used proteomic methods to search for BACE1-interacting proteins in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells, which overexpress BACE1. We identified reticulon 4-B (RTN4-B; Nogo-B) as a BACE1-associated membrane protein. Co-immunoprecipitation experiments confirmed a physical association between BACE1 and RTN4-B, RTN4-C (the shortest isoform of RTN-4), and their homologue reticulon 3 (RTN3), both in SH-SY5Y cells and in transfected human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293 cells. Overexpression of these reticulons (RTNs) resulted in a 30-50% reduction in the secretion of both Abeta40 and Abeta42 from HEK293 cells expressing the AD-associated Swedish mutant amyloid precursor protein (APP), but did not affect Abeta secretion from cells expressing the APP beta-C-terminal fragment (beta-CTF), indicating that these RTNs can inhibit BACE1 activity. Furthermore, a BACE1 mutant lacking most of the N-terminal ectodomain also interacted with these RTNs, suggesting that the transmembrane region of BACE1 is critical for the interaction. We also observed a similar interaction between these RTNs and the BACE1 homologue BACE2. Because RTN3 and RTN4-B/C are substantially expressed in neural tissues, our findings suggest that they play important roles in the regulation of BACE1 function and Abeta production in the brain.

Number:  328
UID:  16885340
Founded words:  ['activation']
Abstract:  The Notch signaling pathway is required in both nonneoplastic neural stem cells and embryonal brain tumors, such as medulloblastoma, which are derived from such cells. We investigated the effects of Notch pathway inhibition on medulloblastoma growth using pharmacologic inhibitors of gamma-secretase. Notch blockade suppressed expression of the pathway target Hes1 and caused cell cycle exit, apoptosis, and differentiation in medulloblastoma cell lines. Interestingly, viable populations of better-differentiated cells continued to grow when Notch activation was inhibited but were unable to efficiently form soft-agar colonies or tumor xenografts, suggesting that a cell fraction required for tumor propagation had been depleted. It has recently been hypothesized that a small population of stem-like cells within brain tumors is required for the long-term propagation of neoplastic growth and that CD133 expression and Hoechst dye exclusion (side population) can be used to prospectively identify such tumor-forming cells. We found that Notch blockade reduced the CD133-positive cell fraction almost 5-fold and totally abolished the side population, suggesting that the loss of tumor-forming capacity could be due to the depletion of stem-like cells. Notch signaling levels were higher in the stem-like cell fraction, providing a potential mechanism for their increased sensitivity to inhibition of this pathway. We also observed that apoptotic rates following Notch blockade were almost 10-fold higher in primitive nestin-positive cells as compared with nestin-negative ones. Stem-like cells in brain tumors thus seem to be selectively vulnerable to agents inhibiting the Notch pathway.

Number:  329
UID:  16848722
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activation', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulates', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  NOTCH-ligand interaction is a highly conserved mechanism that regulates specific cell fate decision during development. In addition to its functions in developmental and cell maturation processes, studies indicate that NOTCH activation plays a role in the onset and progression of many human malignancies. The prevailing new strategy for rationally targeted cancer treatment is aimed at the development of target-selective "smart" drugs on the basis of characterized mechanisms of action. The connection between NOTCH signaling and tumorigenesis suggests that NOTCH may be such a target candidate. Gamma-secretase is a large membrane-integral multisubunit protease complex, which is essential for NOTCH receptor activation. Inhibitors of this enzyme are being developed for Alzheimer's disease, due to its role in cleaving beta-amyloid precursor in the brain. Recently, Gamma-secretase inhibitors (GSIs), as well as various biopharmaceutical or genetic NOTCH signaling inhibitors have been suggested as potential novel cancer therapeutic strategies. This review summarizes the evidence linking NOTCH signaling to several types of cancer, as well as the possible therapeutic indications of NOTCH inhibitors and the challenges facing their clinical development.

Number:  330
UID:  16834339
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Signal peptide peptidase (SPP) is an intramembrane aspartyl protease that cleaves remnant signal peptides after their release by signal peptidase. SPP contains active site motifs also found in presenilin, the catalytic component of the gamma-secretase complex of Alzheimer's disease. However, SPP has a membrane topology opposite that of presenilin, cleaves transmembrane substrates of opposite directionality, and does not require complexation with other proteins. Here we show that, upon isolation of membranes and solubilization with detergent, the biochemical characteristics of SPP are remarkably similar to gamma-secretase. The majority of the SPP-catalyzed cleavages occurred at a single site in a synthetic substrate based on the prolactin (Prl) signal sequence. However, as seen with cleavage of substrates by gamma-secretase, additional cuts at other minor sites are also observed. Like gamma-secretase, SPP is inhibited by helical peptidomimetics and apparently contains a substrate-binding site that is distinct from the active site. Surprisingly, certain nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs known to shift the site of proteolysis by gamma-secretase also alter the cleavage site of Prl by SPP. Together, these findings suggest that SPP and presenilin share certain biochemical properties, including a conserved drug-binding site for allosteric modulation of substrate proteolysis.

Number:  331
UID:  16829951
Founded words:  ['mediate', 'mediate', 'regulated', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Gamma-secretase and signal peptide peptidase (SPP) are unusual GxGD aspartyl proteases, which mediate intramembrane proteolysis. In addition to SPP, a family of SPP-like proteins (SPPLs) of unknown function has been identified. We demonstrate that SPPL2b utilizes multiple intramembrane cleavages to liberate the intracellular domain of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) into the cytosol and the carboxy-terminal counterpart into the extracellular space. These findings suggest common principles for regulated intramembrane proteolysis by GxGD aspartyl proteases.

Number:  332
UID:  16823808
Founded words:  ['interacting', 'interacting', 'binds', 'regulating', 'regulating', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  A neuropathological hallmark of Alzheimer's disease is the presence of amyloid plaques in the brain. Amyloid-beta peptide (Abeta) is the major constituent of the plaques and is generated by proteolytic cleavages of amyloid precursor protein (APP) by beta- and gamma-secretases. Growing evidence shows that lipid rafts are critically involved in regulating the Abeta generation. In support of this, APP, Abeta, and presenilins have been found in lipid rafts. Although cholesterol plays a crucial role in maintaining lipid rafts, functions of other components in the generation of Abeta are unknown. Caveolins (CAVs) and flotillins (FLOTs) are principal proteins related to lipid rafts and have been suggested to be involved in APP processing. Here, we report that FLOT-1 binds to BACE1 (beta-site APP cleaving enzyme 1) and that overexpression of CAV-1 or FLOT-1 results in recruiting BACE1 into lipid rafts and influence on beta-secretase activity in cultured cells. Our results show that both CAV-1 and FLOT-1 may modulate beta-secretase activity by interacting with BACE1.

Number:  333
UID:  16821787
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interactions']
Abstract:  Twenty novel beta-secretase inhibitors containing biarylpiperazine moieties belonging to naphthyl and coumarinyl series were designed for their potential use in Alzheimer's disease therapy. Enzymatic and cell-based assays have been carried out. The biological results clearly demonstrate that specific substituents located at the N(4)-position of the piperazine ring result in excellent in vitro inhibitory potency (IC(50) values ranging between 40 and 70 nM). Variable temperature NMR and modeling studies are consistent with the obtained biological data, since these studies confirmed that introduction at the N(4)-position of the piperazine ring allows productive interactions within the BACE-1 active site, which appear to be determinative for high BACE-1 inhibitory activity. These results are of particular interest since some of the new analogues belonging to the naphthyl series are almost one log more active than the best inhibitor of the similar family recently reported.

Number:  334
UID:  16814100
Founded words:  ['mediated']
Abstract:  The amyloid cascade hypothesis suggests that the insoluble and fibrillar form of beta-amyloid (A beta) may play a primary pathogenic role in Alzheimer disease at the molecular level. However, neither the rate of dementia nor the extent of neuronal change seems to correlate with the levels of amyloidotic plaques (i.e., aggregated/fibrillar A beta). Recent evidence suggests, however, that neurotoxicity may be exerted also by rather small soluble aggregates of A beta, including oligomers. To characterize the mechanisms underlying toxicity mediated by the various aggregation states of A beta peptides is then a major goal of research. In this work we investigated the effects of fibrillar, prefibrillar, and oligomeric A beta(1-42) on the induction of oxidative stress, cell death, and BACE-1 expression in NT2 neuronal cells. We found that prefibrillar and oligomeric A beta(1-42) resulted in a more dramatic increase in the oxidative stress markers 4-hydroxynonenal and hydrogen peroxide compared to fibrillar A beta(1-42). Moreover, increased oxidative stress levels also resulted in a more rapid and significant induction of both apoptotic and necrotic neuronal cell death. Accordingly, fibrillar A beta(1-42), but not the soluble nonfibrillar forms, was the only condition able to up-regulate BACE-1 expression and activity.

Number:  335
UID:  16806063
Founded words:  ['regulator']
Abstract:  Under normal conditions, the cellular prion protein (PrP(c)) undergoes a proteolytic attack between amino acids 111 and 112 which gives rise to the N-terminal secreted N1 fragment and its C-terminal membrane-tethered counterpart C1. Importantly, this cleavage precludes the integrity of the neurotoxic 106-126 sequence. Here, we describe an original and reliable assay based on a quenched fluorimetric substrate (JMV2770) encompassing the 111/112 sequence of PrP(c). In whole brain homogenate, the JMV2770-hydrolysing activity is optimal at neutral pH and sensitive to the metalloprotease inhibitor BB3103 but not to acidic and serine protease blockers. JMV2770 is efficiently cleaved by intact HEK293 cells and fibroblasts in culture, consistent with an hydrolysis by a typical ectoprotease. Overexpressions of alpha-secretases a disintegrin and metalloprotease-9 (ADAM9), ADAM10 or TACE (ADAM17) in human cells increase BB3103-sensitive JMV2770 hydrolysis, while invalidation of ADAM10 and TACE or reduced expression of ADAM9 by an antisense approach significantly reduced its cleavage. Finally, analysis of JMV2770 hydrolysis following transient transfection of ADAM10 or ADAM9 cDNA in ADAM10(-/-) fibroblasts allowed to confirm our previous data establishing that ADAM9 does not behave as a genuine alpha-secretase but rather acts as an important upstream regulator of ADAM10 activity.

Number:  336
UID:  16805816
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'associate', 'associate', 'associate', 'interaction', 'bind', 'bind', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  The Alzheimer's disease-linked protein, presenilin, forms the active site of the gamma-secretase enzyme complex. However, three other proteins, nicastrin (NCT), PEN-2 and APH-1, are required for enzyme activity. This complex is responsible for cleaving the beta-amyloid precursor protein to produce amyloid beta and the intracellular domain (AICD). Although much research has focused on the regions of presenilin that are important for gamma-secretase function, less is known about NCT. To further our understanding of the role of NCT in gamma-secretase activity and complex formation, we have undertaken a systematic evaluation of conserved residues in the juxtamembrane region of the extracellular domain of NCT. Two mutants, S632A and W648A, greatly reduce gamma-secretase activity, as seen by a reduction in amyloid beta and AICD levels. Several lines of evidence suggest that these mutations result in reduced gamma-secretase activity because they affect the ability of NCT to stably associate with the other gamma-secretase components. Since NCT and APH-1 must first bind in order for presenilin and PEN-2 to stably join the complex, we propose that S632 and W648 are essential for a stable interaction with APH-1.

Number:  337
UID:  16804564
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulatory']
Abstract:  Gamma-secretase is a membrane protein complex with unusual aspartyl protease activity that cleaves a variety of type I transmembrane proteins, such as APP, Notch and E-cadherin, within their transmembranous regions. Gamma-secretase was first recognized because of its role in the production of Abeta peptides that are pathogenic in Alzheimer's disease. There is overwhelming evidence demonstrating that four components, presenilin, nicastrin, APH-1 and PEN-2, are necessary and sufficient for gamma-secretase activity. However, based on the findings of studies conducted on cells overexpressing these four components, the existence of regulatory components of the gamma-secretase complex has been postulated. Recently, an additional subunit of the gamma-secretase complex, membrane protein CD147, has been identified through the purification and characterization of endogenous complexes from HeLa cell membranes. Removal of CD147 from gamma-secretase complexes increases the production of Abeta-peptides. Elucidating the molecular mechanism by which CD147 exerts its effect on the activity of the gamma-secretase complex will help us to further understand the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease, and may allow for the development of novel therapeutics.

Number:  338
UID:  16803455
Founded words:  ['mediated', 'mediated', 'regulated']
Abstract:  We have previously reported that protein lipidation in the form of palmitoylation and farnesylation is critical for the production of Abeta (amyloid beta-peptide), the dimerization of beta-secretase and its trafficking into cholesterol-rich microdomains. As statins influence these lipid modifications in addition to their effects on cholesterol biosynthesis, we have investigated the effects of lovastatin and SIMVA (simvastatin) at a range of concentrations chosen to distinguish different cellular effects on Abeta production and beta-secretase structure and its localization in bHEK cells [HEK-293 cells (human embryonic kidney cells) transfected with the Asp-2 gene plus a polyhistidine coding tag] cells. We have compared the changes brought about by statins with those brought about by the palmitoylation inhibitor cerulenin and the farnesyltransferase inhibitor CVFM (Cys-Val-Phe-Met). The statin-mediated reduction in Abeta production correlated with an inhibition of beta-secretase dimerization into its more active form at all concentrations of statin investigated. These effects were reversed by the administration of mevalonate, showing that these effects were mediated via 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA-dependent pathways. At low (1 microM) statin concentrations, reduction in Abeta production and inhibition of beta-secretase dimerization were mediated by inhibition of isoprenoid synthesis. At high (>10 microM) concentrations of statins, inhibition of beta-secretase palmitoylation occurred, which we demonstrated to be regulated by intracellular cholesterol levels. There was also a concomitant concentration-dependent change in beta-secretase subcellular trafficking. Significantly, Abeta release from cells was markedly higher at 50 microM SIMVA than at 1 microM, whereas these concentrations resulted in similar reductions in total Abeta production, suggesting that low-dose statins may be more beneficial than high doses for the therapeutic treatment of Alzheimer's disease.

Number:  339
UID:  16794858
Founded words:  ['association', 'regulation', 'regulation']
Abstract:  The nature of the association between ischemic stroke and Alzheimer's disease (AD) at the cellular and molecular level is still unknown. We evaluated the effect of ischemic neuronal insults on the regulation of amyloid precursor protein (APP) processing. We used an in vitro model of cerebral ischemia (oxygen-glucose deprivation) to evaluate the effect of ischemic neuronal insults on the amyloidogenic and non-amyloidogenic pathways using human neuroblastoma cell line and primary cultured cells of transgenic mice which expressed human APP (Tg2576). Ischemic neuronal insults increased the production of Abeta in Tg2576 primary culture cells compared to controls. A disintegrin and metalloprotease 10 (ADAM 10) was markedly increased in early stage of ischemic insults, which was followed by decreased level of ADAM 10 expression in later stage. The protein and mRNA expression of beta-site cleavage enzyme (BACE) and BACE activity was not significantly different between the group of ischemic insults and control. By contrast, the activity of gamma-secretase was significantly increased after 4 h of ischemic insults, as compared to controls. The present study showed that the ischemic neuronal insults increased the production of Abeta by influencing APP metabolism, which may link the role of ischemic insults to the pathogenesis of AD.

Number:  340
UID:  16782893
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activated', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  In contrast with the early view of metalloproteases as simple extracellular matrix-degrading entities, recent findings show that they are highly specific modulators of different signaling pathways involved, positively or negatively, in tumor development. Thus, before considering a given metalloprotease a therapeutic target, it seems advisable to characterize its function by identifying its repertoire of substrates. Here, we present a proteomic approach to identify ADAM17 substrates by difference gel electrophoresis. We found that the shedding of the extracellular domain of the transferrin receptor and those of two cell-cell adhesion molecules, activated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule (ALCAM) and desmoglein 2 (Dsg-2), is increased in cells overexpressing ADAM17. Genetic evidence shows that while ADAM17 is responsible for the shedding of ALCAM, both ADAM17 and ADAM10 can act on Dsg-2. Activation of the epidermal growth factor receptor leads to the upregulation of the shedding of Dsg-2 and to the concomitant upregulation of ADAM17, but not ADAM10, supporting the ability of overexpressed ADAM17 to shed Dsg-2. These results unveil a role of ADAM10 and ADAM17 in the shedding of cell-cell adhesion molecules. Since loss of cell adhesion is an early event in tumor development, these results suggest that ADAM17 is a useful target in anticancer therapy.

Number:  341
UID:  16775329
Founded words:  ['activated', 'mediates', 'regulator']
Abstract:  Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is a human tumor virus expressing latent antigens critical for pathogenesis. The mechanism by which KSHV mediates oncogenesis has not been fully elucidated. Notch signaling is an evolutionarily conserved pathway controlling diverse events related to development, proliferation, and tissue homeostasis. Deregulation of Notch signaling has also been shown to be highly correlated with oncogenesis. Here we show that the activated intracellular domain of Notch1 (ICN) is aberrantly accumulated in latently KSHV-infected pleural effusion lymphoma cells and results in increased proliferation. Specifically, growth of the infected cells was dramatically inhibited at the G(1) phase by treatment with a gamma-secretase inhibitor which specifically blocks the production of ICN. Increased ICN also up-regulated the cyclin D1 cell cycle regulator. Taken together, these studies define an important mechanism directly linking latent KSHV infection to induction of oncogenesis through dysregulation of the conserved Notch signaling pathway.

Number:  342
UID:  16768455
Founded words:  ['interact', 'interact', 'binding', 'binding', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Gamma-secretase is a founding member of membrane-embedded aspartyl proteases that cleave substrates within transmembrane domains, and this enzyme is an important target for the development of therapeutics for Alzheimer's disease. The structure of gamma-secretase and its precise catalytic mechanism still remain largely unknown. Gamma-secretase is a complex of four integral membrane proteins, with presenilin (PS) as the catalytic component. To gain structural and functional information about the nine-transmembrane domain (TMD) presenilin, we employed a cysteine mutagenesis/disulfide cross-linking approach. Here we report that native Cys92 is close to both Cys410 and Cys419, strongly implying that TMD1 and TMD8 are adjacent to each other. This structural arrangement also suggests that TMD8 is distorted from an ideal helix. Importantly, binding of an active site directed inhibitor, but not a docking site directed inhibitor, reduces the ability of the native cysteine pairs of PS1 to cross-link upon oxidation. These findings suggest that the conserved cysteines of TMD1 and TMD8 contribute to or allosterically interact with the active site of gamma-secretase.

Number:  343
UID:  16762326
Founded words:  ['regulated', 'regulated']
Abstract:  Alzheimer's disease is more frequent following an ischemic or hypoxic episode, with levels of beta-amyloid peptides elevated in brains from patients. Similar increases are found after experimental ischemia in animals. It is possible that increased beta-amyloid deposition arises from alterations in amyloid precursor protein (APP) metabolism, indeed, we have shown that exposing cells of neuronal origin to chronic hypoxia decreased the secretion of soluble APP (sAPPalpha) derived by action of alpha-secretase on APP, coinciding with a decrease in protein levels of ADAM10, a disintegrin metalloprotease which is thought to be the major alpha-secretase. In the current study, we extended those observations to determine whether the expression of ADAM10 and another putative alpha-secretase, TACE, as well as the beta-secretase, BACE1 were regulated by chronic hypoxia at the level of protein and mRNA. Using Western blotting and RT-PCR, we demonstrate that after 48 h chronic hypoxia, such that sAPPalpha secretion is decreased by over 50%, protein levels of ADAM10 and TACE and by approximately 60% and 40% respectively with no significant decrease in BACE1 levels. In contrast, no change in the expression of the mRNA for these proteins could be detected. Thus, we conclude that under CH the level of the putative alpha-secretases, ADAM10 and TACE are regulated by post-translational mechanisms, most probably proteolysis, rather than at the level of transcription.

Number:  344
UID:  16757812
Founded words:  ['regulatory', 'regulated']
Abstract:  The main characteristic of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is brain deposition of the beta-amyloid (Abeta) peptide, generated endoproteolytically from Abeta precursor protein (APP) by beta- and gamma-secretases. A transmembrane aspartyl protease, beta-APP-cleaving enzyme (BACE1), was identified as beta-secretase. Although BACE1 cleaves APP at the beta-secretase site, the role of its homolog, beta-secretase 2 (BACE2) is poorly understood. We report the mRNA expression profile, DNA sequence, and molecular characterization of the BACE2 gene, located on chromosome 21q22.3. The BACE2 gene expresses more strongly in peripheral tissues, although BACE2 mRNA is found in the majority of brain regions, including the postcentral gyrus and temporal lobe. Characterization of 2932 bp of the BACE2 5'-flanking region (GC content of 55%), reveals the absence of canonical CCAAT and TATA boxes within 1 kb of the transcription start site (TSS). The sequence lacks significant internal repeats and has a housekeeping gene structure. Two active regions of the BACE2 promoter determine its basal expression and cell-type specificity. The proximal region (-31/+238) likely determines general basal expression, and the distal region (-2618/-1513), cell-type specificity. Several putative transcription factor sites, particularly SP1, Oct-1, and HES-1, are predicted to be within 1 kb of the TSS. On either side of the proximal promoter region, two negative regulatory domains might reduce BACE2 expression under an induced condition. The BACE2 5'-flanking region is likely to be highly regulated and expressed in a tissue type-specific manner.

Number:  345
UID:  16757811
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'regulatory', 'regulatory', 'regulatory', 'regulatory', 'regulated', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  The beta-amyloid (Abeta) protein present in the neuritic plaques of Alzheimer's disease is cleaved from Abeta precursor protein (APP) by beta- and gamma-secretases. Following identification of beta-APP cleaving enzyme (BACE1) as the beta-secretase, a homologous beta-secretase 2 (BACE2) was described. Our goal is to characterize the regulatory region of the BACE genes. We compare functional domains within the BACE1 and BACE2 regulatory regions. Both BACE genes lack canonical TATAand CAAT boxes, but they contain distinguishing transcription start sites and transcription factor-binding sites. The BACE1 sequence contains more repetitive elements than does BACE2 (no elements). Regulatory domains do not overlap strongly between the two promoter regions. The BACE1upstream sequence contains both negative and positive domains, separated from the transcription seat by a long neutral domain. The corresponding BACE2sequence consists of a weakly positive domain directly upstream of a strongly positive domain, near a functionally active domain. DNA-protein interaction was corroborated by functional data. In primary rat cortical cultures, BACE1-driven reporter protein's expression was twice that of BACE2- driven reporter. The BACE2 gene promoter relatively reduced function in neuronal cells compared with BACE1. The BACE1 gene might operate through a single transcriptional control site. BACE2 operates through dual transcriptional control sites. Two (or more) regulatory pathways might control transcription in BACE2. Thus, BACE2 is partially suppressed in normal neuronal cells and likely to be a highly regulated gene expressed in a particularly tissue-specific fashion.

Number:  346
UID:  16756946
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complexes', 'complex']
Abstract:  The membrane-bound protein complex gamma-secretase is an intramembranous protease whose substrates are a number of type I transmembrane proteins including the beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP). A presenilin molecule is thought to be the catalytic unit of gamma-secretase and either of two presenilin homologues, PS1 or PS2, can play this role. Mutations in the presenilins, apparently leading to aberrant processing of APP, have been genetically linked to early-onset familial Alzheimer's disease. To look for possible molecular heterogeneity in presenilin/gamma-secretase we examined the ability of proteinase K (PK) to digest endogenously expressed presenilins in intact endoplasmic reticulum vesicles. We demonstrate the existence of two physically different forms of gamma-secretase-associated PS1, one that is relatively PK-sensitive and one that is significantly more PK-resistant. A similarly PK-resistant form of PS2 was not observed. We speculate that the structural heterogeneity we observe may underlie, at least in part, previous observations indicating the physical and functional heterogeneity of gamma-secretase. In particular, our results suggest that there are significant differences between gamma-secretase complexes incorporating PS1 and PS2. This difference may underlie the more dominant role of PS1 in the generation of beta-amyloid peptides and in familial Alzheimer's disease.

Number:  347
UID:  16735514
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activation', 'associated', 'regulator', 'regulated']
Abstract:  Membrane cofactor protein CD46 controls complement activation on cells, is a receptor for several pathogens, and modulates immune responses by affecting CD8(+) T cells. Cells can release CD46 in an intact form on membrane vesicles and in a truncated form by a metalloproteolytic cleavage. The mechanism of shedding and its relationship to cell physiology has remained unclear. We have found using RNA interference analysis that a disintegrin and metalloproteinase (ADAM) 10 is responsible for the regulated shedding of the ectodomain of CD46 in apoptotic cells. The shedding of CD46 was initiated with staurosporine and UVB. Exposure of cell cultures to either UVB or staurosporine resulted in changes of cell morphology and detachment of cells from their matrices within 8-24 h. During this process CD46 was released both in apoptotic vesicles (vCD46) and proteolytically (sCD46) into the medium. Both the metalloproteinase inhibitor GM6001 and RNA interference of ADAM10 completely prevented the release of sCD46 and increased the expression of vCD46 on HaCaT cell vesicles, suggesting that ADAM10 releases sCD46 from the apoptotic vesicles. To explore whether the release of sCD46 is associated with apoptosis we analyzed the effects of caspase inhibitors. As expected, the inhibition of caspase activity attenuated the characteristic features of apoptosis and also decreased the release of sCD46. Our results reveal ADAM10 as an important regulator of CD46 expression during apoptosis. The ADAM10-mediated release of CD46 from apoptotic vesicles may represent a form of strategy to allow restricted complement activation to deal with modified self.

Number:  348
UID:  16723274
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Myelin inhibitory ligands of the Nogo-66 receptor (NgR1) limit axon regeneration in the adult CNS. Recent findings have identified additional co-receptors (functional homologues) of the trimeric NgR1 complex, post-translational modifications of the co-receptors within the cell membrane and novel Ca(2+)-dependent cytoplasmic-protein phosphorylation mechanisms. Such unique signalling pathways provide the potential to transduce myelin-derived growth inhibitory signals to the axonal cytoskeleton, and have been areas of intense investigation in recent years. Here, we summarize current understanding of the molecular basis of myelin-derived axon-growth inhibition in the CNS.

Number:  349
UID:  16714209
Founded words:  ['mediated', 'regulating', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulating']
Abstract:  This study examined the effect of amyloid beta peptide (Abeta) and the secretase inhibitors of amyloid precursor proteins (APP) on the spontaneous apoptosis of neutrophils. Abeta(1-40) decreased the apoptotic rate of neutrophils. The delayed apoptosis by Abeta was not blocked by pertussis toxin and N-formyl peptide receptor-like 1 antagonistic peptide, WRWWWW. The inhibitors of phoshoinositide 3-kinase (LY294002), phospholipase C (U73122), or Ca++-dependent protein kinase C (Go6976) abrogated the anti-apoptotic effect of Abeta on neutrophils. Moreover, the Abeta-induced delay of apoptosis was inhibited by a calcium chelator, BAPTA/AM. The amount of the APP protein was reduced in the cultured neutrophils and the APP level in the Abeta or pancaspase-treated neutrophils was lower than that in the cultured neutrophils. However, the reduction in APP level was recovered after treating them with the secretase inhibitors or anti-Fas antibody. The exogenous addition of cell permeable beta- and gamma-secretase inhibitors resulted in an increase in the rate of the apoptosis. The regulation of neutrophil apoptosis by the addition of Abeta and secretase inhibitors occurred via the caspase -8, -9, -3, and mitochondrial-dependent pathways. This suggests that the intracellular beta-amyloid proteins play a role as regulating factor of neutrophil survival and that Abeta-induced delay of apoptosis is mediated by other receptors rather than a seven-transmembrane G protein-coupled receptor(s).

Number:  350
UID:  16687212
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex', 'regulatory', 'regulatory', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  N-cadherin is essential for excitatory synaptic contact in the hippocampus. At the sites of synaptic contact, it forms a complex with Presenilin 1(PS1) and beta-catenin. N-cadherin is cleaved by ADAM10 in response to NMDA receptor stimulation, producing a membrane fragment Ncad/CTF1 in neurons. NMDA receptor stimulation also enhances PS1/gamma-secretase-mediated cleavage of N-cadherin. To characterize the regulatory mechanisms of the ADAM10 and PS1-mediated cleavages, we first identified the precise cleavage sites of N-cadherin by ADAM10 and PS1/gamma-secretase by producing cleavage-deficient N-cadherin mutants. Next, we found that ectodomain shedding of N-cadherin by ADAM10 is a primary regulatory step in response to calcium influx, and that it is required for the subsequent PS1/gamma-secretase-mediated epsilon-cleavage of N-cadherin, which is a constitutive process to yield a cytoplasmic fragment, Ncad/CTF2. Since N-cadherin is essential for the structure and function of synapses including the long-term potentiation, those proteolytic events of N-cadherin should affect the adhesive behavior of the synapses, thereby taking part in learning and memory.

Number:  351
UID:  16685144
Founded words:  ['regulated']
Abstract:  Cadherin switching is thought to contribute to melanoma progression. E-cadherin expression is downregulated, facilitating the release of contacts with keratinocytes, while N-cadherin expression is increased, potentially contributing to more migration. Proteolytic cleavage of the cadherin extracellular domain, a process called ectodomain shedding, is one way to decrease cadherin cell surface expression. In addition, the released ectodomain could actively contribute to a more invasive phenotype. To examine if melanoma progression correlates with increased cadherin ectodomain shedding, we tested the presence of N- and E-cadherin extracellular domains in different melanoma cell lines and the presence of E-cadherin in sera of patients. Shedding occurs and is regulated in several melanoma cell lines expressing these cadherins. No correlation could be found between cadherin shedding and invasive capacity of the cell lines. However, we did find a significant increase in serum E-cadherin levels of melanoma patients with advanced disease correlating with increased S100 tumor marker values, suggesting that increased cadherin shedding may contribute to melanoma progression.

Number:  352
UID:  16680150
Founded words:  ['activating']
Abstract:  Mice transgenic for antisense Notch and normal mice treated with inhibitors of the Notch-activating enzyme gamma-secretase showed reduced damage to brain cells and improved functional outcome in a model of focal ischemic stroke. Notch endangers neurons by modulating pathways that increase their vulnerability to apoptosis, and by activating microglial cells and stimulating the infiltration of proinflammatory leukocytes. These findings suggest that Notch signaling may be a therapeutic target for treatment of stroke and related neurodegenerative conditions.

Number:  353
UID:  16648485
Founded words:  ['activation', 'interactions', 'interactions', 'binds', 'regulation', 'regulatory', 'regulation', 'regulates', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Several receptor protein tyrosine phosphatases (RPTPs) are cell adhesion molecules involved in homophilic interactions, suggesting that RPTP outside-in signaling is coupled to cell contact formation. However, little is known about the mechanisms by which cell density regulates RPTP function. We show that the MAM family prototype RPTPkappa is cleaved by three proteases: furin, ADAM 10, and gamma-secretase. Cell density promotes ADAM 10-mediated cleavage and shedding of RPTPkappa. This is followed by gamma-secretase-dependent intramembrane proteolysis of the remaining transmembrane part to release the phosphatase intracellular portion (PIC) from the membrane, thereby allowing its translocation to the nucleus. When cells were treated with leptomycin B, a nuclear export inhibitor, PIC accumulated in nuclear bodies. PIC is an active protein tyrosine phosphatase that binds to and dephosphorylates beta-catenin, an RPTPkappa substrate. The expression of RPTPkappa suppresses beta-catenin's transcriptional activity, whereas the expression of PIC increases it. Notably, this increase required the phosphatase activity of PIC. Thus, both isoforms have acquired opposing roles in the regulation of beta-catenin signaling. We also found that RPTPmu, another MAM family member, undergoes gamma-secretase-dependent processing. Our results identify intramembrane proteolysis as a regulatory switch in RPTPkappa signaling and implicate PIC in the activation of beta-catenin-mediated transcription.

Number:  354
UID:  16645044
Founded words:  ['activation', 'binding', 'binding', 'mediated', 'mediated', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulate', 'regulated', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  The proteolytic cleavage of Alzheimer beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP) and signaling receptor Notch is mediated by the PS/gamma-secretase complex, which consists of presenilins, nicastrin, APH-1, and PEN-2. Although the four components are known to coordinately regulate each other at the protein level, information regarding their transcription regulation is scarce. Here we characterized the 5'-flanking region of the human APH-1A gene and identified a 271-bp fragment containing the transcription initiation site for the promoter activity. Sequence analysis, mutagenesis, and gel shift studies revealed a binding of AP4 and HIF-1 to the promoter, which affects the promoter activity. Activation of HIF-1 by short-term NiCl2 treatments (a condition of chemical hypoxia) dramatically increased APH-1A mRNA and protein expression, accompanied by increased secretion of Abeta and decreased APP CTFs formation, indicative of an increase in gamma-secretase activity. NiCl2 treatments had little effect on APP and the other three components of the gamma-secretase complex. The cellular concentration of Notch intracellular domain (NICD) was also increased by the hypoxic treatment. Our results demonstrate that APH-1A expression and the gamma-secretase mediated Abeta and Notch NICD generation are regulated by HIF-1, and the specific control of APH-1A expression may imply physiological functions uniquely assigned to APH-1A.

Number:  355
UID:  16641999
Founded words:  ['interacting', 'interacting', 'complex', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complex', 'regulatory', 'regulates', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  The presenilin proteins (PS1 and PS2) and their interacting partners nicastrin, aph-1 (refs 4, 5) and pen-2 (ref. 5) form a series of high-molecular-mass, membrane-bound protein complexes that are necessary for gamma-secretase and epsilon-secretase cleavage of selected type 1 transmembrane proteins, including the amyloid precursor protein, Notch and cadherins. Modest cleavage activity can be generated by reconstituting these four proteins in yeast and Spodoptera frugiperda (sf9) cells. However, a critical but unanswered question about the biology of the presenilin complexes is how their activity is modulated in terms of substrate specificity and/or relative activities at the gamma and epsilon sites. A corollary to this question is whether additional proteins in the presenilin complexes might subsume these putative regulatory functions. The hypothesis that additional proteins might exist in the presenilin complexes is supported by the fact that enzymatically active complexes have a mass that is much greater than predicted for a 1:1:1:1 stoichiometric complex (at least 650 kDa observed, compared with about 220 kDa predicted). To address these questions we undertook a search for presenilin-interacting proteins that differentially affected gamma- and epsilon-site cleavage events. Here we report that TMP21, a member of the p24 cargo protein family, is a component of presenilin complexes and differentially regulates gamma-secretase cleavage without affecting epsilon-secretase activity.

Number:  356
UID:  16636269
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  Gamma-secretase is an intramembrane-cleaving aspartyl protease required for the normal development of metazoans because it processes Notch within cellular membranes to release its signaling domain. More than two dozen additional substrates of diverse functions have been reported, including the Notch ligands Delta and Jagged, N- and E-cadherins, and a sodium channel subunit. The protease is causally implicated in Alzheimer's disease because it releases the neurotoxic amyloid beta-peptide (Abeta) from its precursor, APP. Gamma-secretase occurs as a large complex containing presenilin (bearing the active site aspartates), nicastrin, Aph-1, and Pen-2. Because the complex contains at least 18 transmembrane domains, crystallographic approaches to its structure are difficult and remote. We recently purified the human complex essentially to homogeneity from stably expressing mammalian cells. Here, we use EM and single-particle image analysis on the purified enzyme, which produces physiological ratios of Abeta40 and Abeta42, to obtain structural information on an intramembrane protease. The 3D EM structure revealed a large, cylindrical interior chamber of approximately 20-40 A in length, consistent with a proteinaceous proteolytic site that is occluded from the hydrophobic environment of the lipid bilayer. Lectin tagging of the nicastrin ectodomain enabled proper orientation of the globular, approximately 120-A-long complex within the membrane and revealed approximately 20-A pores at the top and bottom that provide potential exit ports for cleavage products to the extra- and intracellular compartments. Our reconstructed 3D map provides a physical basis for hydrolysis of transmembrane substrates within a lipid bilayer and release of the products into distinct subcellular compartments.

Number:  357
UID:  16619032
Founded words:  ['activation', 'regulator']
Abstract:  Aging of the brain is characterized by marked changes in the expression levels of the neurotrophin receptors, TrkA and p75(NTR). An expression pattern in which TrkA predominates in younger animals switches to one in which p75(NTR) predominates in older animals. This TrkA-to-p75(NTR) switch is accompanied by activation of the second messenger ceramide, stabilization of beta-site amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzyme-1 (BACE1), and increased production of amyloid beta-peptide (Abeta). Here, we show that the insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF1-R), the common regulator of lifespan and age-related events in many different organisms, is responsible for the TrkA-to-p75(NTR) switch in both human neuroblastoma cell lines and primary neurons from mouse brain. The signaling pathway that controls the level of TrkA and p75(NTR) downstream of the IGF1-R requires IRS2, PIP3/Akt, and is under the control of PTEN and p44, the short isoform of p53. We also show that hyperactivation of IGF1-R signaling in p44 transgenic animals, which show an accelerated form of aging, is characterized by early TrkA-to-p75(NTR) switch and increased production of Abeta in the brain.

Number:  358
UID:  16614005
Founded words:  ['functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  The NOTCH signaling pathway performs a wide range of critical functions in a number of different cell types during development and differentiation. The role of NOTCH signals in human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) has not been tested. We measured the activity of canonical NOTCH signaling in undifferentiated embryonic stem (ES) cells and tested the requirement for NOTCH activity in hESC self-renewal or differentiation by growing hESCs in the presence of gamma-secretase inhibitors. Our results suggest that NOTCH signaling is not required for the propagation of undifferentiated human ES cells but instead is required for the maintenance of the differentiating cell types that accumulate in human ES cell cultures. Our studies suggest that NOTCH signaling is not required in human embryonic differentiation until the formation of extraembryonic, germ layer, or tissue-specific stem cells and progenitors.

Number:  359
UID:  16614000
Founded words:  ['activated']
Abstract:  We developed a sensitive and specific activity assay for BACE-1. The assay is based on a genetically engineered proenzyme that is specifically activated by BACE-1. The resulting active enzyme is measured with a chromogenic substrate. The use of 2 coupled reactions produces a detection limit as low as 0.4 pmol/L.

Number:  360
UID:  16611980
Founded words:  ['function', 'function']
Abstract:  beta-Site beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP)-cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) is the beta-secretase in vivo for processing APP to generate amyloid beta protein (Abeta). Abeta deposition in the brain is the hallmark of Alzheimer's disease (AD) neuropathology. Inhibition of BACE1 activity has major pharmaceutical potential for AD treatment. The expression of the BACE1 gene is relatively low in vivo. The control of BACE1 expression has not been well defined. There are six upstream AUGs (uAUGs) in the 5' leader sequence of the human BACE1 mRNA. We investigated the role of the promoter and the uATGs in the 5' untranslated region (UTR) of the human BACE1 gene in BACE1 gene transcription and translation initiation. Our results show that the first and second uATGs are the integral part of the core minimal promoter of the human BACE1 gene, while the third uAUG is skipped over by ribosomal scanning. The fourth uAUG can function as a translation initiation codon, and deletion or mutation of this uAUG increases downstream gene expression. The fourth uAUG of the BACE1 5'UTR is responsible for inhibiting the expression of BACE1. Translation initiation by the BACE1 uAUGs and physiological AUG requires intact eIF4G. Our results demonstrate that during human BACE1 gene expression, ribosomes skipped some uAUGs by leaky scanning and translated an upstream open reading frame, initiated efficiently at the fourth uAUG, and subsequently reinitiated BACE1 translation at the physiological AUG site. Such leaky scanning and reinitiation resulted in weak expression of BACE1 under normal conditions. Alterations of the leaky scanning and reinitiation in BACE1 gene expression could play an important role in AD pathogenesis.

Number:  361
UID:  16605258
Founded words:  ['mediates', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulate', 'regulated', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  The presenilin (PS)/gamma-secretase complex, which contains not only PS but also Aph-1, PEN-2, and nicastrin, mediates proteolysis of the transmembrane domain of beta-amyloid protein precursor (betaAPP). Intramembrane proteolysis occurs at the interface between the membrane and cytosol (epsilon-site) and near the middle of the transmembrane domain (gamma-site), generating the betaAPP intracellular domain (AICD) and Alzheimer disease-associated Abeta, respectively. Both cleavage sites exhibit some diversity. Changes in the precision of gamma-cleavage, which potentially results in secretion of pathogenic Abeta42, have been intensively studied, while those of epsilon-cleavage have not. Although a number of PS-associated factors have been identified, it is unclear whether any of them physiologically regulate the precision of cleavage by PS/gamma-secretase. Moreover, there is currently no clear evidence of whether PS/gamma-secretase function differs according to the subcellular site. Here, we show that endocytosis affects the precision of PS-dependent epsilon-cleavage in cell culture. Relative production of longer AICDepsilon49 increases on the plasma membrane, whereas that of shorter AICDepsilon51 increases on endosomes; however, this occurs without a concomitant major change in the precision of cleavage at gamma-sites. Moreover, very similar changes in the precision of epsilon-cleavage are induced by alteration of the pH. Our findings demonstrate that the precision of epsilon-cleavage by PS/gamma-secretase changes depending upon the conditions and the subcellular location. These results suggest that the precision of cleavage by the PS/gamma-secretase complex may be physiologically regulated by the subcellular location and conditions.

Number:  362
UID:  16569643
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'binds', 'binding', 'binding', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Gamma-secretase is a multimeric membrane protein complex composed of presenilin (PS), nicastrin, Aph-1 and, Pen-2 that is responsible for the intramembrane proteolysis of various type I transmembrane proteins, including amyloid beta-precursor protein and Notch. The direct labeling of PS polypeptides by transition-state analogue gamma-secretase inhibitors suggested that PS represents the catalytic center of gamma-secretase. Here we show that one of the major gamma-secretase inhibitors of dipeptidic type, N-[N-(3,5-difluorophenacetyl)-l-alanyl]-S-phenylglycine t-butyl ester (DAPT), targets the C-terminal fragment of PS, especially the transmembrane domain 7 or more C-terminal region, by designing and synthesizing DAP-BpB (N-[N-(3,5-difluorophenacetyl)-l-alanyl]-(S)-phenylglycine-4-(4-(8-biotinamido)octylamino)benzoyl)benzyl)methylamide), a photoactivable DAPT derivative. We also found that DAP-BpB selectively binds to the high molecular weight gamma-secretase complex in an activity-dependent manner. Photolabeling of PS by DAP-BpB is completely blocked by DAPT or its structural relatives (e.g. Compound E) as well as by arylsulfonamides. In contrast, transition-state analogue inhibitor L-685,458 or alpha-helical peptidic inhibitor attenuated the photolabeling of PS1 only at higher concentrations. These data illustrate the DAPT binding site as a novel functional domain within the PS C-terminal fragment that is distinct from the catalytic site or the substrate binding site.

Number:  363
UID:  16565325
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interactions', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulatory', 'regulated']
Abstract:  The multistep model of leukocyte recruitment to sites of inflammation has helped elucidate specific molecular cues for each of the individual steps. However, it is less clear how cells transition between the different steps and how the complex interactions are coordinately regulated. Once a leukocyte sticks to the endothelium, it only takes a few minutes to reach the subendothelial basement membrane, so the transitions and regulatory mechanisms must be rapid. We put forward the hypothesis that proteolytic shedding of cell surface proteins provides a mechanism to aid in the rapid transition of cells and coordinate the complex, multistep process of leukocyte recruitment in response to inflammatory stimuli. Support for this hypothesis is provided from analyses of disease states and from studies with protease inhibitors and genetically engineered mutations that prevent "ectodomain shedding" of cell surface proteins and consequently perturb the inflammatory response.

Number:  364
UID:  16539675
Founded words:  ['interact', 'interact', 'complex', 'complex', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  gamma-Secretase is a key enzyme involved in the processing of the beta-amyloid precursor protein into amyloid beta-peptides (Abeta). Abeta accumulates and forms plaques in Alzheimer's disease (AD) brains. A progressive neurodegeneration and cognitive decline occurs during the course of the disease, and Abeta is believed to be central for the molecular pathogenesis of AD. Apoptosis has been implicated as one of the mechanisms behind the neuronal cell loss seen in AD. We have studied preservation and activity of the gamma-secretase complex during apoptosis in neuroblastoma cells (SH-SY5Y) exposed to staurosporine (STS). We report that the known components (presenilin, Nicastrin, Aph-1 and Pen-2) interact and form active gamma-secretase complexes in apoptotic cells. In addition, the fragments corresponding to the PS1 N-terminal fragment and the caspase-cleaved PS1 C-terminal fragment (PS1-caspCTF) were found to form active gamma-secretase complexes when co-expressed in presenilin (PS) knockout cells. Interestingly, PS1-caspCTF replaced the normal PS1 C-terminal fragment and was co-immunoprecipitated with the gamma-secretase complex in SH-SY5Y cells exposed to STS. In addition, Abeta was detected in medium from apoptotic HEK APP(swe) cells. Together, the data show that gamma-secretase complexes containing PS1-caspCTF are active, and suggest that this proteolytic activity is also important in dying cells and may affect the progression of AD.

Number:  365
UID:  16539391
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activation', 'activation', 'activators', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  Using as our lead structure a potent PKC ligand (1) that we had previously described, we investigated a series of branched DAG-lactones to optimize the scaffold for PKC binding affinity and reduced lipophilicity, and we examined the potential utility of select compounds as alpha-secretase activators. Activation of alpha-secretase upon PKC stimulation by ligands causes increased degradation of the amyloid precursor protein (APP), resulting in enhanced secretion of sAPPalpha and reduced deposition of beta-amyloid peptide (Abeta), which is implicated in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease. We modified in a systematic manner the C5-acyl group, the 3-alkylidene, and the lactone ring in 1 and established structure-activity relationships for this series of potent PKC ligands. Select DAG-lactones with high binding affinities for PKC were evaluated for their abilities to lead to increased sAPPalpha secretion as a result of alpha-secretase activation. The DAG-lactones potently induced alpha-secretase activation, and their potencies correlated with the corresponding PKC binding affinities and lipophilicities. Further investigation indicated that 2 exhibited a modestly higher level of sAPPalpha secretion than did phorbol 12,13-dibutyrate (PDBu).

Number:  366
UID:  16531402
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activator', 'activator', 'activates', 'binding', 'binds', 'binding', 'regulator', 'regulate']
Abstract:  The single-transmembrane receptor SorLA/LR11 contains binding domains typical for lipoprotein receptors and a VPS10 domain, which binds the neuropeptide head-activator. This undecapeptide enhances proliferation of neuronal precursor cells in a SorLA-dependent manner. Using specific inhibitors we found previously that head activator activates shedding of SorLA by the metalloprotease TACE close to the transmembrane domain releasing the large extra-cellular part of the receptor. Here we show that the remaining COOH-terminal membrane fragment of SorLA is processed by gamma-secretase. Inhibition of gamma-secretase by specific inhibitors or overexpression of dominant negative presenilin mutants and knock out of the presenilin genes led to accumulation of the SorLA membrane fragment and also of full-length SorLA in the membrane. In an in vitro assay we observed the gamma-secretase-dependent release of the two soluble cleavage products, the SorLA cytoplasmic domain and the SorLA beta-peptide. These processing steps are reminiscent of a novel signaling pathway that has been described for the notch receptor. Here, the notch cytoplasmic domain is released into the cytoplasm by the gamma-secretase and migrates to the nucleus where it acts as a transcriptional regulator. In parallel we found that a fusion protein of the released cytoplasmic tail of SorLA with EGFP located to the nucleus only if the nuclear localization signal of SorLA was intact. In a reporter gene assay the cytoplasmic domain of SorLA acted as a transcriptional activator indicating that SorLA might directly regulate transcription after activation by gamma-secretase.

Number:  367
UID:  16524370
Founded words:  ['mediate', 'mediate', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  beta-Amyloid peptide accumulates in the brain of patients affected by sporadic or familial forms of Alzheimer's disease. It derives from the proteolytic attacks of the beta-amyloid precursor protein (betaAPP) by beta- and gamma-secretase activities. An additional epsilon cleavage taking place a few residues C-terminal to the gamma-site has been reported, leading to the formation of an intracellular fragment referred to as APP intracellular domain C50. This epsilon cleavage received particular attention because it resembles the S3 Notch cleavage generating Notch intracellular domain. Indeed, APP intracellular domain, like its Notch counterpart, appears to mediate important physiological functions. gamma and epsilon cleavages on betaAPP appear spatio-temporally linked but pharmacologically distinct and discriminable by mutagenesis approaches. As these cleavages could be seen as either deleterious (gamma-site) or beneficial (epsilon-site), it appears of most interest to set up models aimed at studying these activities separately, particularly to design specific and bioavailable inhibitors. On the other hand, it is important to respect the topology of the substrates in order to examine physiologically relevant cleavages. Here we describe the obtention of cells overexpressing APPepsilon, the epsilon-secretase-derived N-terminal fragment of betaAPP. Interestingly, this N-terminal fragment of betaAPP was shown by biochemical and immunohistochemical approaches to behave as a genuine membrane-bound protein. APPepsilon undergoes constitutive and protein kinase C-regulated alpha-secretase cleavages. Furthermore, APPepsilon is targeted by the beta-secretase beta-site APP-cleaving enzyme and is subsequently cleaved by gamma-secretase. The resulting beta-amyloid peptide production is fully prevented by various gamma-secretase inhibitors. Altogether, our study shows that APPepsilon is a relevant betaAPP derivative to study gamma-secretase activities and to design specific inhibitors without facing any rate-limiting effect of epsilon-secretase-derived cleavage.

Number:  368
UID:  16451048
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  A series of novel beta-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme (BACE-1) inhibitors containing an aminoethylene (AE) tetrahedral intermediate isostere were synthesized and evaluated in comparison to corresponding hydroxyethylene (HE) compounds. Enzymatic inhibitory values were similar for both isosteres, as were structure-activity relationships with respect to stereochemical preference and substituent variation (P2/P3, P1, and P2'); however, the AE compounds were markedly more potent in a cell-based assay for reduction of beta-secretase activity. The incorporation of preferred P2/P3, P1, and P2' substituents into the AE pharmacophore yielded compound 7, which possessed enzymatic and cell assay IC(50)s of 26 nM and 180 nM, respectively. A three-dimensional crystal structure of 7 in complex with BACE-1 revealed that the amino group of the inhibitor core engages the catalytic aspartates in a manner analogous to hydroxyl groups in HE inhibitors. The AE isostere class represents a promising advance in the development of BACE-1 inhibitors.

Number:  369
UID:  16449801
Founded words:  ['regulating', 'regulating']
Abstract:  Deposition of amyloid beta protein (Abeta) is one of the characteristic features of Alzheimer's disease (AD) neuropathology. Beta-secretase, a beta-site APP cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1), is essential for Abeta biosynthesis. Although inhibition of BACE1 is considered a valid therapeutic target for AD, the enzymatic dynamics of BACE1 in regulating APP processing and Abeta generation has not yet been fully defined. To examine this issue, tightly controlled inducible BACE1 gene expression was established in the neuronal cell line N2ABP1 and the non-neuronal cell line E2BP1 using an ecdysone-inducible system. The BACE1 protein level was increased in a time- and dosage-dependent manner in the inducible BACE1 stable cells by treatment with inducer ponasterone A. The generation of APP CTFbeta, the beta-secretase product, increased proportionally with the level of BACE1 protein expression. However, Abeta40/42 production sharply increased to the plateau level with a relatively small increase in BACE1 expression. Although further increasing BACE1 expression increased beta-secretase activity, it had no additional effect on Abeta production. Furthermore, we found that BACE1 mRNA levels and BACE1 promoter activity were significantly lower than APP mRNA levels and APP promoter activity. Our data demonstrate that lower BACE transcription is responsible for the minority of APP undergoing the amyloidogenic pathway and relatively lower Abeta production in the normal conditions, and that a slight increase in BACE1 can induce a dramatic elevation in Abeta production, indicating that the increase in BACE1 can potentially increase neuritic plaque formation in the pathological condition.

Number:  370
UID:  16449647
Founded words:  ['activation', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'mediate', 'mediate', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulated', 'functions', 'function', 'function', 'functions']
Abstract:  Gamma-secretase, which is responsible for the intramembranous cleavage of Alzheimer's beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP), the signaling receptor Notch, and many other substrates, is a multiprotein complex consisting of at least four components: presenilin (PS), nicastrin, APH-1, and PEN-2. Despite the fact that PEN-2 is known to mediate endoproteolytic cleavage of full-length PS and APH-1 and nicastrin are required for maintaining the stability of the complex, the detailed physiological function of each component remain elusive. Unlike that of PS, the transcriptional regulation of PEN-2, APH-1, and nicastrin has not been investigated. Here, we characterized the upstream regions of the human PEN-2 gene and identified a 238-bp fragment located 353 bp upstream of the translational start codon as the key region necessary for the promoter activity. Further analysis revealed a CREB binding site located in the 238-bp region that is essential for the transcriptional activity of the PEN-2 promoter. Mutation of the CREB site abolished the transcriptional activity of the PEN-2 promoter. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis showed the binding of CREB to the PEN-2 promoter region both in vitro and in vivo. Activation of the CREB transcriptional factor by forskolin dramatically promoted the expression of PEN-2 mRNA and protein, whereas the other components of the gamma-secretase complex remained unaffected. Forskolin treatment slightly increases the secretion of soluble APPalpha and Abeta without affecting Notch cleavage. These results demonstrate that expression of PEN-2 is regulated by CREB and suggest that the specific control of PEN-2 expression may imply additional physiological functions uniquely assigned to PEN-2.

Number:  371
UID:  16449386
Founded words:  ['association', 'binds', 'mediates']
Abstract:  Presenilin (PS1/PS2) is a major component of gamma-secretase, the activity that mediates proteolysis of beta-amyloid precursor protein to generate beta-amyloid (Abeta). Here we demonstrate that PS1, through its loop region, binds to phospholipase D1 (PLD1), thereby recruiting it to the Golgi/trans-Golgi network. Overexpression of wild-type PLD1 reduces Abeta generation. Conversely, down-regulation of endogenous PLD1 by small hairpin RNA elevates Abeta production. The Abeta-lowering effect of PLD1 is independent of its ability to promote vesicular budding of beta-amyloid precursor protein. The data indicate that overexpression of PLD1 decreases, and down-regulation of PLD1 increases, the catalytic activity, and the association of the subunits, of gamma-secretase.

Number:  372
UID:  16440311
Founded words:  ['activation', 'binding', 'binding', 'mediated']
Abstract:  The discoidin domain receptor 1 (DDR1) is a receptor tyrosine kinase that is highly expressed in breast carcinoma cells. Upon binding to collagen, DDR1 undergoes autophosphorylation followed by limited proteolysis to generate a tyrosine phosphorylated C-terminal fragment (CTF). Although it was postulated that this fragment is formed as a result of shedding of the N-terminal ectodomain, collagen-dependent release of the DDR1 extracellular domain has not been demonstrated. We now report that, in conjunction with CTF formation, collagen type I stimulates concentration-dependent, saturable shedding of the DDR1 ectodomain from two carcinoma cell lines, and from transfected cells. In contrast, collagen did not promote cleavage of other transmembrane proteins including the amyloid precursor protein (APP), ErbB2, and E-cadherin. Collagen-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation and proteolysis of DDR1 in carcinoma cells were reduced by a pharmacologic Src inhibitor. Moreover, expression of a dominant negative Src mutant protein in human embryonic kidney cells inhibited collagen-dependent phosphorylation and shedding of co-transfected DDR1. The hydroxamate-based metalloproteinase inhibitor TAPI-1 (tumor necrosis factor-alpha protease inhibitor-1), and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP)-3, also blocked collagen-evoked DDR1 shedding, but did not reduce levels of the phosphorylated CTF. Neither shedding nor CTF formation were affected by the gamma-secretase inhibitor, L-685,458. The results demonstrate that collagen-evoked ectodomain cleavage of DDR1 is mediated in part by Src-dependent activation or recruitment of a matrix- or disintegrin metalloproteinase, and that CTF formation can occur independently of ectodomain shedding. Delayed shedding of the DDR1 ectodomain may represent a mechanism that limits DDR1-dependent cell adhesion and migration on collagen matrices.

Number:  373
UID:  16407538
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interactions', 'interactions', 'interactions', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interacts', 'interacts', 'interact', 'interactions', 'interactions', 'interactions', 'interactions', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interacts', 'interacts', 'interact', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  sorLA is a recently identified neuronal receptor for amyloid precursor protein (APP) that is known to interact with APP and affect its intracellular transport and processing. Decreased levels of sorLA in the brain of Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients and elevated levels of amyloid-beta peptide (Abeta) in sorLA-deficient mice point to the importance of the receptor in this neurodegenerative disorder. We analyzed APP cleavage in an APP-shedding assay and found that both sorLA and, surprisingly, a sorLA tail construct inhibited APP cleavage in a beta-site APP-cleaving enzyme (BACE)-dependent manner. In line with this finding, sorLA and the sorLA tail significantly reduced secreted Abeta levels when BACE was overexpressed, suggesting that sorLA influences beta-cleavage. To understand the effect of sorLA on APP cleavage by BACE, we analyzed whether sorLA interacts with APP and/or BACE. Because both full-length sorLA and sorLA C-terminal tail constructs were functionally relevant for APP processing, we analyzed sorLA-APP for a potential cytoplasmatic interaction domain. sorLA and C99 coimmunoprecipitated, pointing toward the existence of a new cytoplasmatic interaction site between sorLA and APP. Moreover, sorLA and BACE also coimmunoprecipitate. Thus, sorLA interacts both with BACE and APP and might therefore directly affect BACE-APP complex formation. To test whether sorLA impacts BACE-APP interactions, we used a fluorescence resonance energy transfer assay to evaluate BACE-APP interactions in cells. We discovered that sorLA significantly reduced BACE-APP interactions in Golgi. We postulate that sorLA acts as a trafficking receptor that prevents BACE-APP interactions and hence BACE cleavage of APP.

Number:  374
UID:  16405513
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'function', 'function', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Mutations in human presenilin (PS) genes cause aggressive forms of familial Alzheimer's disease. Presenilins are polytopic proteins that harbour the catalytic site of the gamma-secretase complex and cleave many type I transmembrane proteins including beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP), Notch and syndecan 3. Contradictory results have been published concerning whether PS mutations cause 'abnormal' gain or (partial) loss of function of gamma-secretase. To avoid the possibility that wild-type PS confounds the interpretation of the results, we used presenilin-deficient cells to analyse the effects of different clinical mutations on APP, Notch, syndecan 3 and N-cadherin substrate processing, and on gamma-secretase complex formation. A loss in APP and Notch substrate processing at epsilon and S3 cleavage sites was observed with all presenilin mutants, whereas APP processing at the gamma site was affected in variable ways. PS1-Delta9 and PS1-L166P mutations caused a reduction in beta-amyloid peptide Abeta40 production whereas PS1-G384A mutant significantly increased Abeta42. Interestingly PS2, a close homologue of PS1, appeared to be a less efficient producer of Abeta than PS1. Finally, subtle differences in gamma-secretase complex assembly were observed. Overall, our results indicate that the different mutations in PS affect gamma-secretase structure or function in multiple ways.

Number:  375
UID:  16371134
Founded words:  ['activation', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulated']
Abstract:  The presenilin (PS) complex, including PS, nicastrin (NCT), APH-1 and PEN-2, is essential for gamma-secretase activity. Previously, the PS C-terminal tail was shown to be essential for gamma-secretase activity. Here, to further understand the precise mechanism underlying the activation of gamma-secretase regulated by PS cofactors, we focused on the role of the PS1 C-terminal region including transmembrane domain (TM) 8 in gamma-secretase activity. For this purpose, we co-expressed C-terminally truncated PS1 (PS1DeltaC) completely lacking gamma-secretase activity and the PS1 C-terminal short fragment in PS-null cells, because the successful reconstitution of gamma-secretase activity in PS-null cells by the co-expression of PS1DeltaC and the PS1 C-terminal short fragment would allow us to investigate the role of the PS1 C-terminal region in gamma-secretase activity. We found that the exogenous expression of the PS1 C-terminal short fragment with NCT and APH-1 completely rescued a defect of the gamma-secretase activity of PS1DeltaC in PS-null cells. With this reconstitution system, we demonstrate that both TM8 and the PS1 C-terminal seven-amino-acid-residue tail are involved in the formation of the active gamma-secretase complex via the assembly of PS1 with NCT and APH-1.

Number:  376
UID:  16365303
Founded words:  ['associated']
Abstract:  Much evidence indicates that women have a higher risk of developing Alzheimer's disease (AD) than do men. The reason for this gender difference is unclear. We hypothesize that estrogen deficiency in the brains of women with AD may be a key risk factor. In rapidly acquired postmortem brains from women with AD, we found greatly reduced estrogen levels compared with those from age- and gender-matched normal control subjects; AD and control subjects had comparably low levels of serum estrogen. We examined the onset and severity of AD pathology associated with estrogen depletion by using a gene-based approach, by crossing the estrogen-synthesizing enzyme aromatase gene knockout mice with APP23 transgenic mice, a mouse model of AD, to produce estrogen-deficient APP23 mice. Compared with APP23 transgenic control mice, estrogen-deficient APP23 mice exhibited greatly reduced brain estrogen and early-onset and increased beta amyloid peptide (Abeta) deposition. These mice also exhibited increased Abeta production, and microglia cultures prepared from the brains of these mice were impaired in Abeta clearance/degradation. In contrast, ovariectomized APP23 mice exhibited plaque pathology similar to that observed in the APP23 transgenic control mice. Our results indicate that estrogen depletion in the brain may be a significant risk factor for developing AD neuropathology.

Number:  377
UID:  16363061
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activated', 'activated', 'associated', 'regulates', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Notch receptor-mediated intracellular events represent an ancient cell signaling system, and alterations in Notch expression are associated with various malignancies in which Notch may function as an oncogene or less commonly as a tumor suppressor. Notch signaling regulates cell fate decisions in the epidermis, including influencing stem cell dynamics and growth/differentiation control of cells in skin. Because of increasing evidence that the Notch signaling network is deregulated in human malignancies, Notch receptors have become attractive targets for selective killing of malignant cells. Compared with proliferating normal human melanocytes, melanoma cell lines are characterized by markedly enhanced levels of activated Notch-1 receptor. By using a small molecule gamma-secretase inhibitor (GSI) consisting of a tripeptide aldehyde, N-benzyloxycarbonyl-Leu-Leu-Nle-CHO, which can block processing and activation of all four different Notch receptors, we identified a specific apoptotic vulnerability in melanoma cells. GSI triggers apoptosis in melanoma cells, but only G2/M growth arrest in melanocytes without subsequent cell death. Moreover, GSI treatment induced a pro-apoptotic BH3-only protein, NOXA, in melanoma cells but not in normal melanocytes. The use of GSI to induce NOXA induction overcomes the apoptotic resistance of melanoma cells, which commonly express numerous cell survival proteins such as Mcl-1, Bcl-2, and survivin. Taken together, these results highlight the concept of synthetic lethality in which exposure to GSI, in combination with melanoma cells overexpressing activated Notch receptors, has lethal consequences, producing selective killing of melanoma cells, while sparing normal melanocytes. By identifying signaling pathways that contribute to the transformation of melanoma cells (e.g. Notch signaling), and anti-cancer agents that achieve tumor selectivity (e.g., GSI-induced NOXA), this experimental approach provides a useful framework for future therapeutic strategies in cutaneous oncology.

Number:  378
UID:  16360140
Founded words:  ['activation', 'regulating', 'regulating']
Abstract:  Notch pathway is crucial for stem/progenitor cell maintenance, growth and differentiation in a variety of tissues. Using a transgenic cell ablation approach, we found in our previous study that cells expressing Notch1 are crucial for prostate early development and re-growth. Here, we further define the role of Notch signaling in regulating prostatic epithelial cell growth and differentiation using biochemical and genetic approaches in ex vivo or in vivo systems. Treatment of developing prostate grown in culture with inhibitors of gamma-secretase/presenilin, which is required for Notch cleavage and activation, caused a robust increase in proliferation of epithelial cells co-expressing cytokeratin 8 and 14, lack of luminal/basal layer segregation and dramatically reduced branching morphogenesis. Using conditional Notch1 gene deletion mouse models, we found that inactivation of Notch1 signaling resulted in profound prostatic alterations, including increased tufting, bridging and enhanced epithelial proliferation. Cells within these lesions co-expressed both luminal and basal cell markers, a feature of prostatic epithelial cells in predifferentiation developmental stages. Microarray analysis revealed that the gene expression in a number of genetic networks was altered following Notch1 gene deletion in prostate. Furthermore, expression of Notch1 and its effector Hey-1 gene in human prostate adenocarcinomas were found significantly down-regulated compared to normal control tissues. Taken together, these data suggest that Notch signaling is critical for normal cell proliferation and differentiation in the prostate, and deregulation of this pathway may facilitate prostatic tumorigenesis.

Number:  379
UID:  16354928
Founded words:  ['functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  A transmembrane aspartyl protease termed beta-site APP cleavage enzyme 1 (BACE1) that cleaves the amyloid-beta precursor protein (APP), which is abundant in neurons, is required for the generation of amyloid-beta (Abeta) peptides implicated in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). We now demonstrate that BACE1, enriched in neurons of the CNS, is a major determinant that predisposes the brain to Abeta amyloidogenesis. The physiologically high levels of BACE1 activity coupled with low levels of BACE2 and alpha-secretase anti-amyloidogenic activities in neurons is a major contributor to the accumulation of Abeta in the CNS, whereas other organs are spared. Significantly, deletion of BACE1 in APPswe;PS1DeltaE9 mice prevents both Abeta deposition and age-associated cognitive abnormalities that occur in this model of Abeta amyloidosis. Moreover, Abeta deposits are sensitive to BACE1 dosage and can be efficiently cleared from the CNS when BACE1 is silenced. However, BACE1 null mice manifest alterations in hippocampal synaptic plasticity as well as in performance on tests of cognition and emotion. Importantly, memory deficits but not emotional alterations in BACE1(-/-) mice are prevented by coexpressing APPswe;PS1DeltaE9 transgenes, indicating that other potential substrates of BACE1 may affect neural circuits related to emotion. Our results establish BACE1 and APP processing pathways as critical for cognitive, emotional, and synaptic functions, and future studies should be alert to potential mechanism-based side effects that may occur with BACE1 inhibitors designed to ameliorate Abeta amyloidosis in AD.

Number:  380
UID:  16344553
Founded words:  ['activated', 'regulatory']
Abstract:  Ectodomain shedding of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) is a key regulatory step in the generation of the Alzheimer disease amyloid beta peptide (Abeta). The molecular mechanisms underlying the control of APP shedding remain little understood but are in part dependent on the low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP), which is involved in APP endocytosis. Here, we show that the APP homolog APLP1 (amyloid precursor-like protein 1) influences APP shedding. In human embryonic kidney 293 cells expression of APLP1 strongly activated APP shedding by alpha-secretase and slightly reduced beta-secretase cleavage. As revealed by domain deletion analysis, the increase in APP shedding required the NPTY amino acid motif within the cytoplasmic domain of APLP1. This motif is conserved in APP and is essential for the endocytosis of APP and APLP1. Unrelated membrane proteins containing similar endocytic motifs did not affect APP shedding, showing that the increase in APP shedding was specific to APLP1. In LRP-deficient cells APLP1 no longer induced APP shedding, suggesting that in wild-type cells APLP1 interferes with the LRP-dependent endocytosis of APP and there by increases APP alpha-cleavage. In fact, an antibody uptake assay revealed that expression of APLP1 reduced the rate of APP endocytosis. In summary, our study provides a novel mechanism for APP shedding, in which APLP1 affects the endocytosis of APP and makes more APP available for alpha-secretase cleavage.

Number:  381
UID:  16342950
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'interact', 'associated', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interact', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  Accumulation of the cytotoxic 40- to 42-residue beta-amyloid peptide represents the primary pathological process in Alzheimer's disease (AD). BACE1 (beta-site APP cleaving enzyme 1) is responsible for the initial required step in the neuronal amyloidogenic processing of beta-amyloid precursor protein and is a major drug target for the therapeutic intervention of AD. In the present study, BACE1 is initially synthesized as an immature precursor protein containing part of the pre domain and the entire pro domain, and undergoes autocatalytic conversion to yield the well-folded mature BACE1 enzyme. To understand the mechanism of the conversion and the role of the pro domain, we monitored the autocatalytic conversion of BACE1 by heteronuclear NMR spectroscopy and used chemical shift perturbations as a probe to study the structural changes accompanying the autocatalytic conversion. NMR data revealed local conformational changes from a partially disordered to a well-folded conformation associated with the conversion. The conformational changes are largely concentrated in the NH(2)-terminal lobe. Conversely, the active site conformations are conserved during the autocatalytic conversion. The precursor and mature BACE1 proteins were further characterized for their ability to interact with a substrate-based transition state BACE1 peptide inhibitor. The precursor BACE1 rapidly adopted the bound conformation in the presence of the inhibitor, which is identical to the bound conformation of the mature protein. The interaction of the inhibitor with both the precursor BACE1 and the fully processed BACE1 is in slow exchange on the NMR time scale, indicating a tight binding interaction. Overall, the NMR data demonstrated that the pro domain does not hinder inhibitor binding and may assist in the proper folding of the protein. The fully processed BACE1 represents a high quality well-folded protein which is highly stable over a long period of time, and is suitable for evaluation of inhibitor binding by NMR for drug intervention.

Number:  382
UID:  16305800
Founded words:  ['activation', 'associated', 'complex', 'complex', 'function', 'function', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  BACE2 is a membrane-bound aspartic protease of the A1 family with a high level of sequence homology to BACE1. While BACE1 is involved in the generation of amyloid plaques in Alzheimer's disease by cleaving Abeta-peptides from the amyloid precursor protein, the physiological function of BACE2 is not well understood. BACE2 appears to be associated with the early onset of dementia in patients with Down's syndrome, and it has been shown to be highly expressed in breast cancers. Further, it may participate in the function of normal and abnormal processes of human muscle biology. Similar to other aspartic proteases, BACE2 is expressed as an inactive zymogen requiring the cleavage of its pro-sequence during the maturation process. We have produced mature BACE2 by expression of pro-BACE2 in Escherichia coli as inclusion bodies, followed by refolding and autocatalytic activation at pH 3.4. Using a C and N-terminally truncated BACE2 variant, we were able to crystallize and determine the crystal structure of mature BACE2 in complex with a hydroxyethylamine transition-state mimetic inhibitor at 3.1 angstroms resolution. The structure of BACE2 follows the general fold of A1 aspartic proteases. However, similar to BACE1, its C-terminal domain is significantly larger than that of the other family members. Furthermore, the structure of BACE2 reveals differences in the S3, S2, S1' and S2' active site substrate pockets as compared to BACE1, and allows, therefore, for a deeper understanding of the structural features that may facilitate the design of selective BACE1 or BACE2 inhibitors.

Number:  383
UID:  16305624
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  The Alzheimer's disease-associated beta-amyloid peptide is produced through cleavage of amyloid precursor protein by beta-secretase and gamma-secretase. gamma-Secretase is a complex containing presenilin (PS) as the catalytic component and three essential cofactors: Nicastrin, anterior pharynx defective (APH-1) and presenilin enhancer-2 (PEN-2). PS and signal peptide peptidase (SPP) define a novel family of aspartyl proteases that cleave substrates within the transmembrane domain presumptively using two membrane-embedded aspartic acid residues for catalysis. Apart from the two aspartate-containing active site motifs, the only other region that is conserved between PS and SPP is a PAL sequence at the C-terminus. Although it has been well documented that this motif is essential for gamma-secretase activity, the mechanism underlying such a critical role is not understood. Here we show that mutations in this motif affect the conformation of the active site of gamma-secretase resulting in a complete loss of PS binding to a gamma-secretase transition state analog inhibitor, Merck C. Analogous mutations in SPP significantly inhibit its enzymatic activity. Furthermore, these mutations also abolish SPP binding to Merck C, indicating that SPP and gamma-secretase share a similar active site conformation, which is dependent on the PAL motif. Exploring the amino acid requirements within this motif reveals a very small side chain requirement, which is conserved during evolution. Together, these observations strongly support the hypothesis that the PAL motif contributes to the active site conformation of gamma-secretase and of SPP.

Number:  384
UID:  16303768
Founded words:  ['association', 'associated', 'mediated', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulation', 'regulation']
Abstract:  Processing of amyloid precursor protein (APP) is a well acknowledged central pathogenic mechanism in Alzheimer disease. However, influences of age-associated cellular alterations on the biochemistry of APP processing have not been studied in molecular detail so far. Here, we report that processing of endogenous APP is down-regulated during the aging of normal human fibroblasts (IMR-90). The generation of intracellular APP cleavage products C99, C83, and AICD gradually declines with increasing life span and is accompanied by a reduced secretion of soluble APP (sAPP) and sAPPalpha. Further, the maturation of APP was reduced in senescent cells, which has been shown to be directly mediated by age-associated increased cellular cholesterol levels. Of the APP processing secretases, protein levels of constituents of the gamma-secretase complex, presenilin-1 (PS1) and nicastrin, were progressively reduced during aging, resulting in a progressive decrease in gamma-secretase enzymatic activity. ADAM10 (a disintegrin and metalloprotease 10) and BACE (beta-site APP-cleaving enzyme) protein levels exhibited no age-associated regulation, but interestingly, BACE enzymatic activity was increased in aged cells. PS1 and BACE are located in detergent-resistant membranes (DRMs), well structured membrane microdomains exhibiting high levels of cholesterol, and caveolin-1. Although total levels of both structural components of DRMs were up-regulated in aged cells, their particular DRM association was decreased. This age-dependent membrane modification was associated with an altered distribution of PS1 and BACE between DRM and non-DRM fractions, very likely affecting their APP processing potential. In conclusion, we have found a significant modulation of endogenous APP processing and maturation in human fibroblasts caused by age-associated alterations in cellular biochemistry.

Number:  385
UID:  16302802
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Conformational analysis in solution of beta-secretase inhibitors 1 and 2 by NMR spectroscopy reveals that the hydroxyethylene isostere, an apparently flexible fragment widely used as a scissile bond replacement in aspartic protease inhibitors, exists in one predominant conformation in solution. This preferred conformation is similar to that adopted by the hydroxyethylene core of 1 in complex with beta-secretase and that adopted by hydroxyethylene cores of related compounds when bound to aspartic proteases, indicating that this structural unit is preorganized in solution.

Number:  386
UID:  16300641
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'bind', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'bind']
Abstract:  Inhibition of gamma-secretase is a potential therapeutic target for Alzheimer's disease (AD). The present studies have characterized the in vitro properties of a radiolabeled small molecule gamma-secretase inhibitor, [3H]compound D (Yan et al., 2004, J. Neurosci.24, 2942-2952) in mammalian brain. [3H]Compound D was shown to bind with nanomolar affinity (Kd = 0.32-1.5 nM) to a single population of saturable sites in rat, rhesus and human brain cortex homogenates, the density of binding sites ranging from 4 to 7 nM across the species. Competition studies with a structurally diverse group of gamma-secretase inhibitors with a wide range of binding affinities showed that the binding affinities of these compounds correlated well with their ability to inhibit gamma-secretase in vitro. Autoradiographic studies showed that the specific binding of [3H]compound D was widely distributed throughout adult rat, rhesus and normal human brain. There did not appear to be any difference in distribution of [3H]compound D specific binding sites in AD cortex compared with control human cortex as measured using tissue section autoradiography, nor any correlation between gamma-secretase binding and plaque burden as measured immunohistochemically. [3H]compound D is a useful tool to probe the expression and pharmacology of gamma-secretase in mammalian brain.

Number:  387
UID:  16293708
Founded words:  ['activation', 'binding', 'binding', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulator', 'regulatory', 'regulated', 'regulated', 'regulates']
Abstract:  As an essential protease in the generation of amyloid beta, gamma-secretase is believed to play an important role in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease. Although a great deal of progress has been made in identifying the components of gamma-secretase complex, the endogenous regulatory mechanism of gamma-secretase is unknown. Here we show that gamma-secretase is endogenously regulated via extracellular signal regulated MAP kinase (ERK) 1/2-dependent mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway. The inhibition of ERK1/2 activity, either by a treatment with a MEK inhibitor or an ERK knockdown transfection, dramatically increased gamma-secretase activity in several different cell types. JNK or p38 kinase inhibitors had little effect, indicating that the effect is specific to ERK1/2-dependent MAPK pathway. Conversely, increased ERK1/2 activity, by adding purified active ERK1/2 or EGF-induced activation of ERK1/2, significantly reduced gamma-secretase activity, demonstrating down-regulation of gamma-secretase activity by ERK1/2. Whereas gamma-secretase expression was not affected by ERK1/2, its activity was enhanced by phosphatase treatment, indicating that ERK1/2 regulates gamma-secretase activity by altering the pattern of phophorylation. Among the components of isolated gamma-secretase complex, only nicastrin was phosphorylated by ERK1/2, and it precipitated with ERK1/2 in a co-immunoprecipitation assay, which suggests binding between ERK1/2 and nicastrin. Our results show that ERK1/2 is an endogenous regulator of gamma-secretase, which raises the possibility that ERK1/2 down-regulates gamma-secretase activity by directly phosphorylating nicastrin.

Number:  388
UID:  16279945
Founded words:  ['regulatory']
Abstract:  Cleavage of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) within the amyloid-beta (Abeta) sequence by the alpha-secretase prevents the formation of toxic Abeta peptides. It has been shown that the disintegrin-metalloproteinases ADAM10 and TACE (ADAM17) act as alpha-secretases and stimulate the generation of a soluble neuroprotective fragment of APP, APPsalpha. Here we demonstrate that the related APP-like protein 2 (APLP2), which has been shown to be essential for development and survival of mice, is also a substrate for both proteinases. Overexpression of either ADAM10 or TACE in HEK293 cells increased the release of neurotrophic soluble APLP2 severalfold. The strongest inhibition of APLP2 shedding in neuroblastoma cells was observed with an ADAM10-preferring inhibitor. Transgenic mice with neuron-specific overexpression of ADAM10 showed significantly increased levels of soluble APLP2 and its C-terminal fragments. To elucidate a possible regulatory mechanism of APLP2 shedding in the neuronal context, we examined retinoic acid-induced differentiation of neuroblastoma cells. Retinoic acid treatment of two neuroblastoma cell lines upregulated the expression of both APLP2 and ADAM10, thus leading to an increased release of soluble APLP2.

Number:  389
UID:  16271805
Founded words:  ['associated', 'regulator']
Abstract:  Control of neuronal spiking patterns resides, in part, in the type and degree of expression of voltage-gated K(+) channel subunits. Previous studies have revealed that soluble forms of the Alzheimer's disease associated amyloid beta protein (Abeta) can increase the 'A'-type current in neurones. In this study, we define the molecular basis for this increase and show that endogenous production of Abeta is important in the modulation of Kv4.2 and Kv4.3 subunit expression in central neurones. A-type K(+) currents, and Kv4.2 and Kv4.3 subunit expression, were transiently increased in cerebellar granule neurones by the 1-40 and 1-42 forms of Abeta (100nM, 2-24h). Currents through recombinant Kv4.2 channels expressed in HEK293 cells were increased in a similar fashion to those through the native channels. Increases in 'A'-type current could be prevented by the use of cycloheximide and brefeldin A, indicating that protein expression and trafficking processes were altered by Abeta, rather than protein degredation. Endogenous Abeta production in cerebellar granule neurones was blocked using inhibitors of either gamma- or beta-secretase and resulted in decreased K(+) current. Crucially this could be prevented by co-application of exogenous Abeta (1nM), however, no change in Kv4.2 or Kv4.3 subunit expression occurred. These data show that Abeta is a modulator of Kv4 subunit expression in neurones at both the functional and the molecular level. Thus Abeta is not only involved in Alzheimer pathology, but is also an important physiological regulator of ion channel expression and hence neuronal excitability.

Number:  390
UID:  16258245
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  HtrA2/Omi is a mammalian mitochondrial serine protease homologous to the E. coli HtrA/DegP gene products. Recently, HtrA2/Omi was found to have a dual role in mammalian cells, acting as an apoptosis-inducing protein and being involved in maintenance of mitochondrial homeostasis. By screening a human brain cDNA library with A beta peptide as bait in a yeast two-hybrid system, we identified HtrA2/Omi as a binding partner of A beta peptide. The interaction between A beta peptide and HtrA2/Omi was confirmed by an immunoblot binding assay. The possible involvement of HtrA2/Omi in A beta peptide metabolism was investigated. In vitro peptide cleavage assays showed that HtrA2/Omi did not directly promote the production of A beta peptide at the beta/gamma-secretase level, or the degradation of A beta peptide. However, overexpression of HtrA2/Omi in K269 cells decreased the production of A beta40 and A beta42 by up to 30%. These results rule out the involvement of HtrA2/Omi in the etiology of Alzheimer's disease. However, the fact that overexpression of HtrA2/Omi reduces the generation of A beta40 and A beta42 suggests that it may play some positive role in mammalian cells.

Number:  391
UID:  16251361
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activation', 'regulating', 'regulated', 'regulating']
Abstract:  The ErbB1 and ErbB2 receptors are oncogenes with therapeutic significance in human cancer, whereas the transforming potential of the related ErbB4 receptor has remained controversial. Here, we have addressed whether four alternatively spliced ErbB4 isoforms differ in regulating cellular responses relevant for tumor growth. We show that the two tumor necrosis factor-alpha converting enzyme (TACE)-cleavable ErbB4 isoforms (the juxtamembrane [JM]-a isoforms) were overexpressed in a subset of primary human breast cancers together with TACE. The overexpression of the JM-a cytoplasmic (CYT)-2 ErbB4 isoform promoted ErbB4 phosphorylation, survival of interleukin-3-dependent cells, and proliferation of breast cancer cells even in the absence of ligand stimulation, whereas activation of the other three ErbB4 isoforms required ligand stimulation. Ligand-independent cellular responses to ErbB4 JM-a CYT-2 overexpression were regulated by both tyrosine kinase activity and a two-step proteolytic generation of an intracellular receptor fragment involving first a TACE-like proteinase, followed by gamma-secretase activity. These data suggest a novel transforming mechanism for the ErbB4 receptor in human breast cancer that is 1) specific for a single receptor isoform and 2) depends on proteinase cleavage and kinase activity but not ligand activation of the receptor.

Number:  392
UID:  16236717
Founded words:  ['activated', 'bind', 'bind', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  gamma-Secretase is an unusual protease with an intramembrane catalytic site that cleaves many type I membrane proteins, including the amyloid beta-protein (Abeta) precursor (APP) and the Notch receptor. Genetic and biochemical studies have identified four membrane proteins as components of gamma-secretase: heterodimeric presenilin composed of its N- and C-terminal fragments, nicastrin, Aph-1, and Pen-2. Here we demonstrated that certain compounds, including protein kinase inhibitors and their derivatives, act directly on purified gamma-secretase to selectively block cleavage of APP- but not Notch-based substrates. Moreover, ATP activated the generation of the APP intracellular domain and Abeta, but not the generation of the Notch intracellular domain by the purified protease complex, and was a direct competitor of the APP-selective inhibitors, as were other nucleotides. In accord, purified gamma-secretase bound specifically to an ATP-linked resin. Finally, a photoactivable ATP analog specifically labeled presenilin 1-C-terminal fragments in purified gamma-secretase preparations; the labeling was blocked by ATP itself and APP-selective gamma-secretase inhibitors. We concluded that a nucleotide-binding site exists within gamma-secretase, and certain compounds that bind to this site can specifically modulate the generation of Abeta while sparing Notch. Drugs targeting the gamma-secretase nucleotide-binding site represent an attractive strategy for safely treating Alzheimer disease.

Number:  393
UID:  16236709
Founded words:  ['regulator']
Abstract:  The cellular prion protein (PrP(c)) is physiologically cleaved in the middle of its 106-126 amino acid neurotoxic region at the 110/111 downward arrow112 peptidyl bond, yielding an N-terminal fragment referred to as N1. We recently demonstrated that two disintegrins, namely ADAM10 and ADAM17 (TACE, tumor necrosis factor alpha converting enzyme) participated in both constitutive and protein kinase C-regulated generation of N1, respectively. These proteolytic events were strikingly reminiscent of those involved in the so-called "alpha-secretase pathway" that leads to the production of secreted sAPPalpha from betaAPP. We show here, by transient and stable transfection analyses, that ADAM9 also participates in the constitutive secretion of N1 in HEK293 cells, TSM1 neurons, and mouse fibroblasts. Decreasing endogenous ADAM9 expression by an antisense approach drastically reduces both N1 and sAPPalpha recoveries. However, we establish that ADAM9 was unable to increase N1 and sAPPalpha productions after transient transfection in fibroblasts depleted of ADAM10. Accordingly, ADAM9 is unable to cleave a fluorimetric substrate of membrane-bound alpha-secretase activity in ADAM10(-/-) fibroblasts. However, we establish that co-expression of ADAM9 and ADAM10 in ADAM10-deficient fibroblasts leads to enhanced membrane-bound and released fluorimetric substrate hydrolyzing activity when compared with that observed after ADAM10 cDNA transfection alone in ADAM10(-/-) cells. Interestingly, we demonstrate that shedded ADAM10 displays the ability to cleave endogenous PrP(c) in fibroblasts. Altogether, these data provide evidence that ADAM9 is an important regulator of the physiological processing of PrP(c) and betaAPP but that this enzyme acts indirectly, likely by contributing to the shedding of ADAM10. ADAM9 could therefore represent, besides ADAM10, another potential therapeutic target to enhance the breakdown of the 106-126 and Abeta toxic domains of the prion and betaAPP proteins.

Number:  394
UID:  16234244
Founded words:  ['activation', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'bind', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'bind', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  gamma-Secretase is a multimeric membrane protein complex comprised of presenilin (PS), nicastrin (Nct), Aph-1, and Pen-2. It is a member of an atypical class of aspartic proteases that hydrolyzes peptide bonds within the membrane. During the biosynthetic process of the gamma-secretase complex, Nct and Aph-1 form a heterodimeric intermediate complex and bind to the C-terminal region of PS, serving as a stabilizing scaffold for the complex. Pen-2 is then recruited into this trimeric complex and triggers endoproteolysis of PS, conferring gamma-secretase activity. Although the Pen-2 accumulation depends on PS, the binding partner of Pen-2 within the gamma-secretase complex remains unknown. We reconstituted PS1 in Psen1/Psen2 deficient cells by expressing a series of PS1 mutants in which one of the N-terminal six transmembrane domains (TMDs) was swapped with those of CD4 (a type I transmembrane protein) or CLAC-P (a type II transmembrane protein). We report that the proximal two-thirds of TMD4 of PS1, including the conserved Trp-Asn-Phe sequence, are required for its interaction with Pen-2. Using a chimeric CD4 molecule harboring PS1 TMD4, we further demonstrate that the PS1 TMD4 bears a direct binding motif to Pen-2. Pen-2 may contribute to the activation of the gamma-secretase complex by directly binding to the TMD4 of PS1.

Number:  395
UID:  16234243
Founded words:  ['activating', 'interactions', 'interaction', 'interactions', 'interaction', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'mediate', 'mediate', 'complexes', 'regulatory']
Abstract:  Macromolecular complexes containing presenilins (PS1 and PS2), nicastrin, anterior pharynx defective phenotype 1 (APH-1), and PS enhancer 2 (PEN-2) mediate the intramembranous, gamma-secretase cleavage of beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP), Notch, and a variety of type 1 membrane proteins. We previously demonstrated that PEN-2 is critical for promoting endoproteolysis of PS1 and that the proximal two-thirds of transmembrane domain (TMD) 1 of PEN-2 is required for binding with PS1. In this study, we sought to identify the structural domains of PS1 that are necessary for binding with PEN-2. To address this issue, we generated a series of constructs encoding PS1 mutants harboring deletions or replacements of specific TMDs of PS1-NTF, and examined the effects of encoded molecules on interactions with PEN-2, stabilization and endoproteolysis of PS1, and gamma-secretase activity. We now show that PS1 TMDs 1 and 2 and the intervening hydrophilic loop are dispensable for binding to PEN-2. Furthermore, analysis of chimeric PS1 molecules that harbor replacements of each TMD with corresponding transmembrane segments from the sterol regulatory element-binding protein cleavage activating protein (SCAP) revealed that the PS1-SCAP TMD4 mutant failed to coimmunoprecipitate endogenous PEN-2, strongly suggesting that the fourth TMD of PS1 is required for interaction with PEN-2. Further mutational analyses revealed that the "NF" sequence within the TMD4 of PS1 is the minimal motif that is required for binding with PEN-2, promoting PS1 endoproteolysis and gamma-secretase activity.

Number:  396
UID:  16227967
Founded words:  ['activates', 'regulate', 'function', 'function', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Amyloid beta peptide (Abeta) has a key role in the pathological process of Alzheimer's disease (AD), but the physiological function of Abeta and of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) is unknown. Recently, it was shown that APP processing is sensitive to cholesterol and other lipids. Hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA reductase (HMGR) and sphingomyelinases (SMases) are the main enzymes that regulate cholesterol biosynthesis and sphingomyelin (SM) levels, respectively. We show that control of cholesterol and SM metabolism involves APP processing. Abeta42 directly activates neutral SMase and downregulates SM levels, whereas Abeta40 reduces cholesterol de novo synthesis by inhibition of HMGR activity. This process strictly depends on gamma-secretase activity. In line with altered Abeta40/42 generation, pathological presenilin mutations result in increased cholesterol and decreased SM levels. Our results demonstrate a biological function for APP processing and also a functional basis for the link that has been observed between lipids and Alzheimer's disease (AD).

Number:  397
UID:  16221845
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activation', 'activation', 'interaction', 'associated', 'interaction']
Abstract:  Acute brain injuries have been identified as a risk factor for developing Alzheimer's disease (AD). Because glutamate plays a pivotal role in these pathologies, we studied the influence of glutamate receptor activation on amyloid-beta (Abeta) production in primary cultures of cortical neurons. We found that sublethal NMDA receptor activation increased the production and secretion of Abeta. This effect was preceded by an increased expression of neuronal Kunitz protease inhibitory domain (KPI) containing amyloid-beta precursor protein (KPI-APP) followed by a shift from alpha-secretase to beta-secretase-mediated APP processing. This shift is a result of the inhibition of the alpha-secretase candidate tumor necrosis factor-alpha converting enzyme (TACE) when associated with neuronal KPI-APPs. This KPI-APP/TACE interaction was also present in AD brains. Thus, our findings reveal a cellular mechanism linking NMDA receptor activation to neuronal Abeta secretion. These results suggest that even mild deregulation of the glutamatergic neurotransmission may increase Abeta production and represent a causal risk factor for developing AD.

Number:  398
UID:  16219802
Founded words:  ['mediates', 'regulatory', 'functions', 'function', 'function', 'function', 'function', 'functions']
Abstract:  Delta-like 4 (Dll4), a membrane-bound ligand for Notch1 and Notch4, is selectively expressed in the developing endothelium and in some tumor endothelium, and it is induced by vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-A and hypoxia. Gene targeting studies have shown that Dll4 is required for normal embryonic vascular remodeling, but the mechanisms underlying Dll4 regulatory functions are currently not defined. In this study, we generated primary human endothelial cells that overexpress Dll4 protein to study Dll4 function and mechanism of action. Human umbilical vein endothelial cells retrovirally transduced with Dll4 displayed reduced proliferative and migratory responses selectively to VEGF-A. Expression of VEGF receptor-2, the principal signaling receptor for VEGF-A in endothelial cells, and coreceptor neuropilin-1 was significantly decreased in Dll4-transduced endothelial cells. Consistent with Dll4 signaling through Notch, expression of HEY2, one of the transcription factors that mediates Notch function, was significantly induced in Dll4-overexpressing endothelial cells. The gamma-secretase inhibitor L-685458 significantly reconstituted endothelial cell proliferation inhibited by immobilized extracellular Dll4 and reconstituted VEGFR2 expression in Dll4-overexpressing endothelial cells. These results identify the Notch ligand Dll4 as a selective inhibitor of VEGF-A biologic activities down-regulating 2 VEGF receptors expressed on endothelial cells and raise the possibility that Dll4 may be exploited therapeutically to modulate angiogenesis.

Number:  399
UID:  16166587
Founded words:  ['activating', 'activating', 'activating']
Abstract:  Recent studies have demonstrated that most patients with T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia (T-ALL) have activating mutations in NOTCH1. We sought to determine whether these mutations are also acquired in mouse models of T-ALL. We sequenced the heterodimerization domain and the PEST domain of Notch1 in our mouse model of TAL1-induced leukemia and found that 74% of the tumors harbor activating mutations in Notch1. Cell lines derived from these tumors undergo G(0)/G(1) arrest and apoptosis when treated with a gamma-secretase inhibitor. In addition, we found activating Notch1 mutations in 31% of thymic lymphomas that occur in mice deficient for various combinations of the H2AX, Tp53, and Rag2 genes. Thus, Notch1 mutations are often acquired as a part of the molecular pathogenesis of T-ALLs that develop in mice with known predisposing genetic alterations.

Number:  400
UID:  16150730
Founded words:  ['regulated']
Abstract:  beta-Amyloid peptides (Abeta) that form the senile plaques of Alzheimer disease consist mainly of 40- and 42-amino acid (Abeta 40 and Abeta 42) peptides generated from the cleavage of the amyloid precursor protein (APP). Generation of Abeta involves beta-secretase and gamma-secretase activities and is regulated by membrane trafficking of the proteins involved in Abeta production. Here we describe a new small molecule, EHT 1864, which blocks the Rac1 signaling pathways. In vitro, EHT 1864 blocks Abeta 40 and Abeta 42 production but does not impact sAPPalpha levels and does not inhibit beta-secretase. Rather, EHT 1864 modulates APP processing at the level of gamma-secretase to prevent Abeta 40 and Abeta 42 generation. This effect does not result from a direct inhibition of the gamma-secretase activity and is specific for APP cleavage, since EHT 1864 does not affect Notch cleavage. In vivo, EHT 1864 significantly reduces Abeta 40 and Abeta 42 levels in guinea pig brains at a threshold that is compatible with delaying plaque accumulation and/or clearing the existing plaque in brain. EHT 1864 is the first derivative of a new chemical series that consists of candidates for inhibiting Abeta formation in the brain of AD patients. Our findings represent the first pharmacological validation of Rac1 signaling as a target for developing novel therapies for Alzheimer disease.

Number:  401
UID:  16135086
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interactions', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  The gamma-secretase complex processes substrate proteins within membranes and consists of four proteins: presenilin (PS), nicastrin, Aph-1 and Pen-2. PS harbours the enzymatic activity of the complex, and there are two mammalian PS homologues: PS1 and PS2. PS undergoes endoproteolysis, generating the N- and C-terminal fragments, NTF and CTF, which represent the active species of PS. To characterize the functional similarity between complexes of various PS composition, we analysed PS1, PS2, and chimeric PS composed of the NTF from PS1 and CTF from PS2, or vice versa, in assembly and function of the gamma-secretase complex. Chimeric PSs, like PS1 and PS2, undergo normal endoproteolysis when introduced into cells devoid of endogenous PS. Furthermore, PS2 CTF can, at least partially, restore processing in a truncated PS1, which cannot undergo endoproteolysis. All PS forms enable maturation of nicastrin and cleave full length Notch receptors, indicating that both PS1 and PS2 are present at the cell surface. Finally, when co-introduced as separate molecules, NTF and CTF of different PS origin reconstitute gamma-secretase activity. In conclusion, these data show that endoproteolysis, NTF-CTF interactions, and the assembly and activity of gamma-secretase complexes are very conserved between PS1 and PS2.

Number:  402
UID:  16115865
Founded words:  ['associate', 'associate', 'associate', 'associated', 'regulation', 'regulation']
Abstract:  The beta-secretase, BACE, is a membrane spanning aspartic protease, which cleaves the amyloid precursor protein (APP) in the first step of proteolytic processing leading to the formation of the neurotoxic beta-amyloid peptide (Abeta). Previous results have suggested that the regulation of beta-secretase and BACE access to APP is lipid dependent, and involves lipid rafts. Using the baculovirus expression system, we have expressed recombinant human full-length BACE in insect cells and purified milligram amounts to homogeneity. We have studied partitioning of fluorophor-conjugated BACE between the liquid ordered and disordered phases in giant (10-150 mum) unilamellar vesicles, and found approximately 20% to associate with the raft-like, liquid-ordered phase; the fraction associated with liquid-ordered phase increased upon cross-linking of raft lipids. To examine involvement of individual lipid species in modulating BACE activity, we have reconstituted the purified BACE in large ( approximately 100 nm) unilamellar vesicles, and determined its specific activity in vesicles of various lipid compositions. We have identified 3 groups of lipids that stimulate proteolytic activity of BACE: 1) neutral glycosphingolipids (cerebrosides), 2) anionic glycerophospholipids, and 3) sterols (cholesterol).

Number:  403
UID:  16114893
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interactions', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'bind', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'bind']
Abstract:  Beta-APP cleaving enzyme (BACE) is responsible for the first of two proteolytic cleavages of the APP protein that together lead to the generation of the Alzheimer's disease-associated Abeta peptide. It is widely believed that halting the production of Abeta peptide, by inhibition of BACE, is an attractive therapeutic modality for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease. BACE is an aspartyl protease, and there is significant effort in the pharmaceutical community to apply traditional design methods to the development of active site-directed inhibitors of this enzyme. We report here the discovery of a ligand binding pocket within the catalytic domain of BACE that is distinct from the enzymatic active site (i.e., an exosite). Peptides, initially identified from combinatorial phage peptide libraries, contain the sequence YPYF(I/L)P(L/I) and bind specifically to this exosite, even in the presence of saturating concentrations of active site-directed inhibitors. Binding of peptides to the BACE exosite leads to a concentration-dependent inhibition of proteolysis for APP-related, protein-based substrates of BACE. The discovery of this exosite opens new opportunities for the identification and development of novel and potentially selective small molecule inhibitors of BACE that act through exosite, rather than active site, binding interactions.

Number:  404
UID:  16103124
Founded words:  ['activated', 'activate', 'activate', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  It has been proposed that gamma-secretase-mediated release of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) intracellular domain (AICD) results in nuclear translocation and signaling through a complex with the adaptor protein Fe65 and the histone acetyltransferase Tip60. Here, we show that APP and Fe65 activate transcription through a Gal4-Tip60 reporter in presenilin-1/2-deficient cells lacking generation of AICD. APP and Fe65 also activated transcription in the presence of gamma-secretase inhibitors that prevent amyloid beta-peptide production in human embryonic kidney 293 and SH-SY5Y cells. In contrast to the transcriptionally active Notch intracellular domain, expression of AICD did not activate transcription. An alternative mechanism for APP signal transduction is suggested by the identification of essential cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) phosphorylation sites in Tip60. Mutation of these Tip60 phosphorylation sites or treatment with the CDK inhibitor roscovitine blocked the ability of APP to signal through Tip60. Moreover, APP stabilized Tip60 through CDK-dependent phosphorylation. Subcellular fractionation and confocal immunofluorescence showed that APP recruited Tip60 to membrane compartments. Thus, APP may signal to the nucleus by a gamma-secretase-independent mechanism that involves membrane sequestration and phosphorylation of Tip60.

Number:  405
UID:  16096062
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binds', 'binding', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  gamma-secretase catalyzes the intramembrane cleavage of amyloid precursor protein (APP) and Notch after their extracellular domains are shed by site-specific proteolysis. Nicastrin is an essential glycoprotein component of the gamma-secretase complex but has no known function. We now show that the ectodomain of nicastrin binds the new amino terminus that is generated upon proteolysis of the extracellular APP and Notch domains, thereby recruiting the APP and Notch substrates into the gamma-secretase complex. Chemical- or antibody-mediated blocking of the free amino terminus, addition of purified nicastrin ectodomain, or mutations in the ectodomain markedly reduce the binding and cleavage of substrate by gamma-secretase. These results indicate that nicastrin is a receptor for the amino-terminal stubs that are generated by ectodomain shedding of type I transmembrane proteins. Our data are consistent with a model where nicastrin presents these substrates to gamma-secretase and thereby facilitates their cleavage via intramembrane proteolysis.

Number:  406
UID:  16096051
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  The gamma-secretase intramembrane protease cleaves many type I membrane proteins including amyloid precursor protein and Notch, generating peptide fragments that are important signaling components. In this issue of Cell, Shah et al. (2005) reveal the function of nicastrin, the largest member of the gamma-secretase complex. They show that the nicastrin extracellular domain is essential for recognition of substrate by the gamma-secretase.

Number:  407
UID:  16095541
Founded words:  ['activators', 'mediator']
Abstract:  Human embryonic kidney cells were transfected with a dominant negative mutant of dynamin I, an important mediator of clathrin-dependent endocytosis, and APP proteolysis was analyzed. Overexpression of the mutant dynamin (dyn I K44A) resulted in increased shedding of the APP ectodomain (sAPPalpha), accumulation of the C-terminal alpha-secretase product C83, and a reduction in the release of Abeta. Levels of mature APP on the cell surface were increased in cells expressing dyn I K44A, and internalization of surface-immunolabeled APP, assessed by fluorescence microscopy, was inhibited. Dynamin is a substrate for protein kinase C (PKC), and it was hypothesized that activators of PKC, which are known to stimulate alpha-secretase-mediated cleavage of APP, might exert their effects by inhibiting dynamin-dependent endocytosis. However, the internalization of surface-biotinylated APP was unaffected by treatment of cells with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate in the presence of the alpha-secretase inhibitor TAPI-1.

Number:  408
UID:  16095541
Founded words:  ['mediate', 'mediate']
Abstract:  The results indicate that APP is internalized by a dynamin-dependent process, and suggest that alterations in the activity of proteins that mediate endocytosis might lead to significant changes in Abeta production.

Number:  409
UID:  16078837
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interactions']
Abstract:  Molecular modeling based on the X-ray crystal structure of the Tang-Ghosh heptapeptide inhibitor 1 (OM99-2) of BACE led to the design and synthesis of a series of constrained P(1)' analogues. A cyclopentane ring was incorporated in 1 spanning the P(1)' Ala methyl group and the adjacent methylene carbon atom of the chain. Progressive truncation at the P(2)'-P(4)' sites led to a potent truncated analogue 5 with good selectivity over Cathepsin D. Using the same backbone replacement concept, a series of cyclopentane, cyclopentanone, tetrahydrofuran, pyrrolidine, and pyrrolidinone analogues were synthesized with considerable variation at the P and P' sites. The cyclopentanone and 2-pyrrolidinone analogues 45 and 57 showed low nM BACE inhibition. X-ray cocrystal structures of two analogues 5 and 45 revealed excellent convergence with the original inhibitor 1 structure while providing new insights into other interactions which could be exploited for future modifications.

Number:  410
UID:  16054886
Founded words:  ['function', 'function', 'functioned']
Abstract:  BC1 RNA is a neuronal cell-specific non-messenger RNA transcribed by RNA polymerase III (Pol III). We previously reported that the transcription of BC1 RNA is controlled both by intragenic promoters for Pol III and by a 5'-flanking region containing several unique cis-elements that are possible members of the Pol II transcription system. In this study, we chose beta-secretase (BACE1) as a target and applied the promoter to produce a short hairpin RNA (shRNA) for RNA interference (RNAi) in cultured neuronal cells. A plasmid vector in which the promoter was linked to a target sequence functioned in rodent NG108-15 cells and suppressed BACE1 protein expression, but did not function in non-neuronal NIH3T3 cells. It was also effective in rat primary hippocampal neurons. We further showed that the promoter can be active in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells and reduced expression of targeted protein, although the BC1 RNA gene is a rodent-specific gene. The use of this vector-based system for shRNA expression may be an important component of future development of neuronal cell-selective RNAi in both transgenic and therapeutic applications.

Number:  411
UID:  16054021
Founded words:  ['activation']
Abstract:  All ligands of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) which has important roles in development and disease, are shed from the plasma membrane by metalloproteases. The ectodomain shedding of EGFR ligands has emerged as a critical component in the functional activation of EGFR in the interreceptor cross-talk. Identification of the sheddases for EGFR ligands using mouse embryonic cells lacking candidate sheddases (a disintegrin and metalloprotease; ADAM) has revealed that ADAM10, -12 and -17 are the sheddases of the EGFR ligands in response to various shedding stimulants such as GPCR agonists, growth factors, cytokines, osmotic stress, wounding and phorbol ester. Among the EGFR ligands, heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor (HB-EGF) is a representative ligand to understand the pathophysiological roles of the ectodomain shedding in wound healing, cardiac diseases, etc. Here we focus on the ectodomain shedding of HB-EGF by ADAMs, which is not only a key event of receptor cross-talk but also a novel intercellular signaling by the carboxy-terminal fragment (CTF signal).

Number:  412
UID:  16046406
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Presenilin (PS) provides the catalytic core of the gamma-secretase complex. Gamma-secretase activity leads to generation of the amyloid beta-peptide, a key event implicated in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer disease. PS has ten hydrophobic regions, which can all theoretically form membrane-spanning domains. Various topology models have been proposed, and the prevalent view holds that PS has an eight-transmembrane (TM) domain organization; however, the precise topology has not been unequivocally determined. Previous topological studies are based on non-functional truncated variants of PS proteins fused to reporter domains, or immunocytochemical staining. In this study, we used a more subtle N-linked glycosylation scanning approach, which allowed us to assess the topology of functional PS1 molecules. Glycosylation acceptor sequences were introduced into full-length human PS1, and the results showed that the first hydrophilic loop is oriented toward the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum, whereas the N terminus and large hydrophilic loop are in the cytosol. Although this is in accordance with most current models, our data unexpectedly revealed that the C terminus localized to the luminal side of the endoplasmic reticulum. Additional studies on the glycosylation pattern after TM domain deletions, combined with computer-based TM protein topology predictions and biotinylation assays of different PS1 mutants, led us to conclude that PS1 has nine TM domains and that the C terminus locates to the lumen/extracellular space.

Number:  413
UID:  16042544
Founded words:  ['activation', 'mediates']
Abstract:  Presenilin 1 plays a central catalytic role in the gamma-secretase processing of amyloid precursor protein, Notch and many other substrates. However, this core component clearly mediates independently several other physiological roles in the cell/neuron. Besides its involvement in beta-catenin degradation, we discuss here the recent implication of presenilin 1 in the turnover of the intercellular cell adhesion molecule, telencephalin, through a degradation route that bears autophagic characteristics. Activation of the endosomal/lysosomal system in general and autophagic degradation in particular, is finally briefly discussed in the context of neurodegenerative diseases.

Number:  414
UID:  16037408
Founded words:  ['activation', 'regulation', 'regulation']
Abstract:  Human Langerhans cells (LCs) are of hematopoietic origin, but cytokine regulation of their development is not fully understood. Notch ligand Delta-1 is expressed in a proportion of the skin. Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) are also secreted in the skin. We report here that Delta-1, in concert with GM-CSF and TGF-beta1, induces the differentiation of human CD14(+) blood monocytes into cells that express LC markers: CD1a, Langerin, cutaneous lymphocyte-associated antigen, CC chemokine receptor 6, E-cadherin, and Birbeck granules. The resulting cells display phagocytic activity and chemotaxis to macrophage inflammatory protein-1alpha (MIP-1alpha). In response to CD40 ligand and tumor necrosis factor alpha, the cells acquire a mature phenotype of dendritic cells that is characterized by up-regulation of human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-ABC, HLA-DR, CD80, CD86, CD40, and CD54 and appearance of CD83. These cells in turn show chemotaxis toward MIP-1beta and elicit activation of CD8(+) T cells and T helper cell type 1 polarization of CD4(+) T cells. Thus, blood monocytes can give rise to LCs upon exposure to the skin cytokine environment consisting of Delta-1, GM-CSF, and TGF-beta1, which may be, in part, relevant to the development of human epidermal LCs. Our results extend the functional scope of Notch ligand delta-1 in human hematopoiesis.

Number:  415
UID:  16014629
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activation', 'activation', 'activation', 'regulates']
Abstract:  The Alzheimer's disease-linked genes, PS1 and PS2, are required for intramembrane proteolysis of multiple type I proteins, including Notch and amyloid precursor protein. In addition, it has been documented that PS1 positively regulates, whereas PS1 familial Alzheimer disease mutations suppress, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt activation, a pathway known to inactivate glycogen synthase kinase-3 and reduce tau phosphorylation. In this study, we show that the loss of presenilins not only inhibits PI3K/Akt signaling and increases tau phosphorylation but also suppresses the MEK/ERK pathway. The deficits in Akt and ERK activation in cells deficient in both PS1 and PS2 (PS-/-) are evident after serum withdrawal and stimulation with fetal bovine serum or ligands of select receptor tyrosine kinases, platelet-derived growth factor receptor beta (PDGFR beta) and PDGFR alpha, but not insulin-like growth factor-1R and epidermal growth factor receptor. The defects in PDGF signaling in PS-/- cells are due to reduced expression of PDGF receptors. Whereas fetal bovine serum-induced Akt activation is reconstituted by both PS1 and PS2 in PS-/- cells, PDGF signaling is selectively restored by PS2 but not PS1 and is dependent on the N-terminal fragment of PS2 but not gamma-secretase activity or the hydrophilic loop of PS2. The rescue of PDGF receptor expression and activation by PS2 is facilitated by FHL2, a PS2-interacting transcriptional co-activator. Finally, we present evidence that PS1 mutations interfere with this PS2-mediated activity by reducing PS2 fragments. These findings highlight important roles of both presenilins in Akt and ERK signaling via select signaling receptors.

Number:  416
UID:  16001967
Founded words:  ['interact', 'interact', 'bind', 'bind', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complexes', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'function', 'function', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Presenilins (PS) are thought to contain the active site for presenilinase endoproteolysis of PS and gamma-secretase cleavage of substrates. The structural requirements for PS incorporation into the gamma-secretase enzyme complex, complex stability and maturation, and appropriate presenilinase and gamma-secretase activity are poorly understood. We used rescue assays to identify sequences in transmembrane domain one (TM1) of PS1 required to support presenilinase and gamma-secretase activities. Swap mutations identified an N-terminal TM1 domain that is important for gamma-secretase activity only and a C-terminal TM1 domain that is essential for both presenilinase and gamma-secretase activities. Exchange of residues 95-98 of PS1 (sw95-98) completely abolishes both activities while the familial Alzheimer's disease mutation V96F significantly inhibits both activities. Reversion of residue 96 back to valine in the sw95-98 mutant rescues PS function, identifying V96 as the critical residue in this region. The TM1 mutants do not bind to an aspartyl protease transition state analog gamma-secretase inhibitor, indicating a conformational change induced by the mutations that abrogates catalytic activity. TM1 mutant PS1 molecules retain the ability to interact with gamma-secretase substrates and gamma-secretase complex members, although Nicastrin stability is decreased by the presence of these mutants. gamma-Secretase complexes that contain V96F mutant PS1 molecules display a partial loss of function for gamma-secretase that alters the ratio of amyloid-beta peptide species produced, leading to the amyloid-beta peptide aggregation that causes familial Alzheimer's disease.

Number:  417
UID:  15994140
Founded words:  ['complexity', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Two-dimensional (2D) gel electrophoresis is the most common protein separation method in proteomics research. It can provide high resolution and high sensitivity. However, 2D gel methods have several limitations, such as labor-intensive procedures, poor reproducibility, and limited dynamic range of detection. In fact, many investigators have returned to couple the one-dimensional (1D) SDS-PAGE with mass spectrometry for protein identification. The limitation of this approach is the increased protein complexity in each one-dimensional gel band. To overcome this problem and provide reproducible quantitative information, we describe here a 2D method for protein mixture separation using a combination of high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and 1D SDS-PAGE. The study shows that the step-gradient fractionation method we have applied provides excellent reproducibility. In addition, high mass accuracy of LC-FTICR-MS can allow more confident protein identifications by high resolution and ultra-high mass measurement accuracy. This approach was applied to comparative proteomics since protein abundance level changes can be easily visualized with side-by-side vertical comparison in one gel. Furthermore, separation of multi-samples in the same gel significantly reduces run-to-run variation, as is shown with differential image gel electrophoresis (DIGE). Finally, this approach readily incorporates immunological methods to normalize relative abundances of multiple samples within a single gel. This paper presents the results of our developments and our initial application of this strategy for mapping protease function of beta amyloid cleaving enzyme (BACE) in biological systems.

Number:  418
UID:  15987683
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Beta-secretase (BACE1) is the rate-limiting protease for the generation of the amyloid beta-peptide (Abeta) in Alzheimer disease. Mice in which the bace1 gene is inactivated are reported to be healthy. However, the presence of a homologous gene encoding BACE2 raises the possibility of compensatory mechanisms. Therefore, we have generated bace1, bace2, and double knockout mice. We report here that BACE1 mice display a complex phenotype. A variable but significant number of BACE1 offspring died in the first weeks after birth. The surviving mice remained smaller than their littermate controls and presented a hyperactive behavior. Electrophysiologically, subtle alterations in the steady-state inactivation of voltage-gated sodium channels in BACE1-deficient neurons were observed. In contrast, bace2 knockout mice displayed an overall healthy phenotype. However, a combined deficiency of BACE2 and BACE1 enhanced the bace1-/- lethality phenotype. At the biochemical level, we have confirmed that BACE1 deficiency results in an almost complete block of Abeta generation in neurons, but not in glia. As glia are 10 times more abundant in brain compared with neurons, our data indicate that BACE2 could indeed contribute to Abeta generation in the brains of Alzheimer disease and, in particular, Down syndrome patients. In conclusion, our data challenge the general idea of BACE1 as a safe drug target and call for some caution when claiming that no major side effects should be expected from blocking BACE1 activity.

Number:  419
UID:  15985438
Founded words:  ['activation', 'association', 'regulates']
Abstract:  Heregulin activation of the endogenous receptor tyrosine kinase ErbB-4 in ZR-75-1 breast cancer cells provokes tyrosine phosphorylation of Hdm2 in a manner that is sensitive to inhibition of alpha- or gamma-secretase activity, indicating that liberation of the tyrosine kinase intracellular domain (ICD) fragment is required. Similar results are obtained when Erbb-4 is exogenously expressed in 32D cells, which do not otherwise express any ErbB family members. Expression of the ErbB-4 ICD fragment leads to its constitutive association with Mdm2 and tyrosine phosphorylation of Mdm2, a protein that is predominantly localized in the nucleus and that regulates p53 levels. When the ErbB-4 ICD fragment was expressed in H1299 cells, it promoted Hdm2 ubiquitination and increased the levels of p53 and p21, a transcriptional target of p53. In addition, expression of the ICD fragment increased p53 activity toward the p21 promoter in a luciferase reporter assay.

Number:  420
UID:  15983030
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'mediator', 'regulator', 'regulated', 'regulated', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 (ACE2) is a critical regulator of heart function and a cellular receptor for the causative agent of severe-acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), SARS-CoV (coronavirus). ACE2 is a type I transmembrane protein, with an extracellular N-terminal domain containing the active site and a short intracellular C-terminal tail. A soluble form of ACE2, lacking its cytosolic and transmembrane domains, has been shown to block binding of the SARS-CoV spike protein to its receptor. In this study, we examined the ability of ACE2 to undergo proteolytic shedding and investigated the mechanisms responsible for this shedding event. We demonstrated that ACE2, heterologously expressed in HEK293 cells and endogenously expressed in Huh7 cells, undergoes metalloproteinase-mediated, phorbol ester-inducible ectodomain shedding. By using inhibitors with differing potency toward different members of the ADAM (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase) family of proteases, we identified ADAM17 as a candidate mediator of stimulated ACE2 shedding. Furthermore, ablation of ADAM17 expression using specific small interfering RNA duplexes reduced regulated ACE2 shedding, whereas overexpression of ADAM17 significantly increased shedding. Taken together, these data provided direct evidence for the involvement of ADAM17 in the regulated ectodomain shedding of ACE2. The identification of ADAM17 as the protease responsible for ACE2 shedding may provide new insight into the physiological roles of ACE2.

Number:  421
UID:  15975090
Founded words:  ['interacts', 'interacts', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulating', 'regulating', 'regulates']
Abstract:  Mutations in presenilin proteins (PS1 and PS2) lead to early-onset Alzheimer's disease. PS proteins are endoproteolytically cleaved into two main fragments: the NTF (PS N-terminal fragment) and the CTF (PS C-terminal fragment). The two fragments are believed to constitute the core catalytic enzyme activity called gamma-secretase, which is responsible for cleaving beta-amyloid precursor protein to release Abeta. Thus, studying factors that modulate PS fragment levels could provide important information about gamma-secretase. Previously, we demonstrated that the protein, ubiquilin-1, interacts both in vivo and in vitro with PS and that overexpression of ubiquilin-1 or -2 leads to increased accumulation of full-length PS proteins. Using wild-type HEK-293 cells (human embryonic kidney 293 cells) and PS-inducible cells, we now show that overexpression of either ubiquilin-1 or -2 decreases the PS NTF and CTF levels. Conversely, siRNA (small interfering RNA)-mediated knockdown of ubiquilin-1 and -2 proteins increased the PS NTF and CTF levels. We considered that ubiquilin might alter PS fragment accumulation by acting as a shuttle factor escorting PS fragments to the proteasome for degradation. However, through proteasome inhibition studies, we show that this does not occur. Instead, our results suggest that ubiquilin regulates PS fragment production. We also examined whether other components of the gamma-secretase complex are affected by ubiquilin expression. Interestingly, overexpression of ubiquilin resulted in a decrease in Pen-2 and nicastrin levels, two essential components of the gamma-secretase complex. In contrast, knockdown of ubiquilin-1 and -2 protein expression by RNAi (RNA interference) increased Pen-2 and nicastrin levels. Finally, we show that inhibition of the proteasome results in decreased PS fragment production and that reversal of proteasome inhibition restores PS fragment production, suggesting that the proteasome may be involved in PS endoproteolysis. These studies implicate ubiquilin as an important factor in regulating PS biogenesis and metabolism.

Number:  422
UID:  15974927
Founded words:  ['regulation', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Several specific topics on recent findings in the studies of memapsin 2 (beta-secretase) are discussed in this article. New structural evidence on memapsin 2 has pointed to the structural basis of flap opening. Such a mechanism is thought to participate in the substrate sequence selection during the cellular function. Another potentially important area is the intracellular transport of memapsin 2. Here we discuss the involvement of APP in memapsin 2 endocytosis and the GGA proteins in recycling the protease back to the cell surface. These mechanisms may be connected with the cellular regulation of neuronal activity through the regulation of memapsin 2 activity and Abeta production.

Number:  423
UID:  15965470
Founded words:  ['activates', 'activating', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'associated', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'binds', 'binds', 'mediates', 'regulated']
Abstract:  Differentiation of CNS glia is regulated by Notch signaling through neuron-glia interaction. Here, we identified Delta/Notch-like EGF-related receptor (DNER), a neuron-specific transmembrane protein, as a previously unknown ligand of Notch during cellular morphogenesis of Bergmann glia in the mouse cerebellum. DNER binds to Notch1 at cell-cell contacts and activates Notch signaling in vitro. In the developing cerebellum, DNER is highly expressed in Purkinje cell dendrites, which are tightly associated with radial fibers of Bergmann glia expressing Notch. DNER specifically binds to Bergmann glia in culture and induces process extension by activating gamma-secretase- and Deltex-dependent Notch signaling. Inhibition of Deltex-dependent, but not RBP-J-dependent, Notch signaling in Bergmann glia suppresses formation and maturation of radial fibers in organotypic slice cultures. Additionally, deficiency of DNER retards the formation of radial fibers and results in abnormal arrangement of Bergmann glia. Thus, DNER mediates neuron-glia interaction and promotes morphological differentiation of Bergmann glia through Deltex-dependent Notch signaling.

Number:  424
UID:  15958385
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Several type I integral membrane proteins, such as the Notch receptor or the amyloid precursor protein, are cleaved in their intramembrane domain by a gamma-secretase enzyme, which is carried within a multiprotein complex. These cleavages generate molecules that are involved in intracellular or extracellular signaling. At least four transmembrane proteins belong to the gamma-secretase complex: presenilin, nicastrin, Aph-1, and Pen-2. It is still unclear whether these proteins are the only components of the complex and whether a unique complex is involved in the different gamma-secretase cleavage events. We have set up a genetic screen based on the permanent acquisition or loss of an antibiotic resistance depending on the presence of an active gamma-secretase able to cleave a Notch-derived substrate. We selected clones deficient in gamma-secretase activity using this screen on mammalian cells after random mutagenesis. We further analyzed two of these clones and identified previously undescribed mutations in the nicastrin gene. The first mutation abolishes nicastrin production, and the second mutation, a point mutation in the ectodomain, abolishes nicastrin maturation. In both cases, gamma-secretase activity on Notch and APP is impaired.

Number:  425
UID:  15950758
Founded words:  ['activated', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'mediated', 'regulated']
Abstract:  Two brain receptors for apolipoprotein E (apoE), the apoE receptor 2 (apoEr2) and the very low density lipoprotein receptor (VLDLr), are important in neuronal migration during development. Using a series of tagged constructs, we found that these two receptors undergo extracellular cleavages to release secreted forms of the receptors and intramembranous cleavages to degrade the C-terminal fragments. Release of the extracellular domains was blocked by an inhibitor of metalloproteinases and increased by PMA. Accumulation of the intracellular domain was increased by the presence of an inhibitor of gamma-secretase. ApoE binding to these receptors caused increased release of the extracellular domain and accumulation of the intracellular domains; similar increases in receptor proteolytic domains were observed from endogenous apoEr2 after treatment of primary neurons or rat hippocampus with an apoE-derived peptide. The human apoE isoforms promoted proteolysis to different degrees, with apoE2 resulting in a greater accumulation of the C-terminal fragments of apoEr2 compared with apoE4. These effects of apoE on receptor proteolysis were mediated by the ligand binding domain of the receptor. Similar promotion of receptor cleavage was seen with two other ligands, reelin and activated alpha2-macroglobulin. We suggest that signaling promoted by these receptors depends in part on these regulated proteolytic events.

Number:  426
UID:  15940249
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activation', 'activated', 'activated', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) is a common neoplasm in HIV-1-infected individuals causing significant morbidity and mortality. Despite recent advances, the pathogenesis of this potentially life-threatening neoplasm remains unclear, and there is currently no cure for KS. Notch proteins are known to play a fundamental role in cell fate decisions including proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. It is, therefore, not surprising that Notch proteins have been implicated in tumorigenesis and appear to function as either oncogenes or tumor suppressor proteins depending on cellular context. In this report, we demonstrate elevated levels of activated Notch-1, -2, and -4 in KS tumor cells in vivo and in vitro compared to endothelial cells, the precursor of the KS cell. Notch activation was confirmed through luciferase reporter assays and localization of Hes (Hairy/Enhancer of Split)-1 and Hey (Hairy/Enhancer of Split related with YRPW)1 (primary targets of the Notch pathway) in KS cell nuclei. Studies using gamma-secretase inhibitors (GSI and LY-411,575), which block Notch activation, resulted in apoptosis in primary and immortalized KS cells. Similar studies injecting GSI into established KS cell tumors on mice demonstrated growth inhibition or tumor regression that was characterized by apoptosis in treated, but not control tumors. The results indicate that KS cells overexpress activated Notch and interruption of Notch signaling inhibits KS cell growth. Thus, targeting Notch signaling may be of therapeutic value in KS patients.

Number:  427
UID:  15917251
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interaction', 'interacts', 'interact', 'associates', 'associates', 'interactions', 'interaction', 'interacts', 'interact', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Presenilin 1 (PS1) is a critical component of the gamma-secretase complex, which is involved in the cleavage of several substrates including the amyloid precursor protein (APP) and the Notch receptor. Recently, the low density receptor-related protein (LRP) has been shown to be cleaved by a gamma-secretase-like activity. We postulated that LRP may interact with PS1 and tested its role as a competitive substrate for gamma-secretase. In this report we show that LRP colocalizes and interacts with endogenous PS1 using coimmunoprecipitation and fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy. In addition, we found that gamma-secretase active site inhibitors do not disrupt the interaction between LRP and PS1, suggesting that the substrate associates with a gamma-secretase docking site located in close proximity to PS1. This is analogous to APP-gamma-secretase interactions. Finally, we show that LRP competes with APP for gamma-secretase activity. Overexpression of a truncated LRP construct consisting of the C terminus, the transmembrane domain, and a short extracellular portion leads to a reduction in the levels of the Abeta40, Abeta42, and p3 peptides without changing the total level of APP expression. In addition, transfection with the beta-chain of LRP causes an increase in uncleaved APP C-terminal fragments and a concomitant decrease in the signaling effects of the APP intracellular domain. In conclusion, LRP is a PS1 interactor and can compete with APP for gamma-secretase enzymatic activity.

Number:  428
UID:  15887117
Founded words:  ['mediator', 'mediators']
Abstract:  Inflammatory mediators and cell fate genes, such as the Notch gene family, both have been implicated in cancer biology. Because cholangiocarcinomas arise in a background of inflammation and express the inflammatory mediator inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), we aimed to determine whether iNOS expression alters Notch expression and signaling.

Number:  429
UID:  15887117
Founded words:  ['mediator']
Abstract:  These data implicate a direct link between the inflammatory mediator iNOS and Notch signaling, and have implications for the development and progression of cholangiocarcinoma.

Number:  430
UID:  15886016
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'interacts', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interacts', 'bind', 'bind', 'mediate', 'mediate', 'regulates']
Abstract:  Golgi-localized, gamma ear-containing, ADP ribosylation factor-binding (GGA) proteins have been shown to be implicated in the sorting of cargo proteins from the trans-Golgi network (TGN) to endosomal compartments. GGAs directly bind to DXXLL motifs in the cytoplasmic domains of cargo proteins. The Alzheimer-associated beta-secretase BACE1 also interacts with GGA proteins, but the functional relevance of this interaction was unknown. Here, we show that GGA1 regulates the retrograde transport of internalized BACE1 from endosomal compartments to the TGN by direct interaction in a phosphorylation-dependent manner. While phosphorylated BACE1 is efficiently transported from endosomes to the TGN, non-phosphorylated BACE1 enters a direct recycling route to the cell surface. Our data indicate that GGA proteins are not only involved in the sorting at the TGN but also mediate the retrograde transport of cargo proteins from endosomes to the TGN.

Number:  431
UID:  15880353
Founded words:  ['associated', 'mediates', 'regulate']
Abstract:  Several lines of neuroimmunological evidence correlate the development of the inflammatory responses of the brain with the formation of amyloid plaques associated with the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's disease. Within this context, we tested the ability of interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) to regulate the processing of beta-amyloid precursor protein (beta-APP) in neuroglioma U251 cells. Our findings have shown that short-term treatment with IL-1beta (2 hr) resulted in a concentration-dependent decrease in the amount of the cell-associated form of beta-APP in U251 cells as compared to untreated cells, whereas a 2-hr treatment with IL-1beta led to increased release of secreted APP(alpha) fragment (sAPP(alpha)) into the conditioned media of the cells. The fact that sAPP(alpha) is an alpha-secretase cleavage metabolite of the cell-associated form of beta-APP, and the observation that IL-1beta-induced sAPP(alpha) release could be blocked by tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases-1 (alpha-secretase inhibitors), suggested that alpha-secretase might be involved in IL-1beta-induced-sAPP(alpha) release. Moreover, to determine whether an intracellular signaling pathway mediates the IL-1beta-induced increase in sAPP(alpha) secretion, we used various specific signaling inhibitors and found that sAPP(alpha) release is significantly blocked by the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MEK1/2) inhibitor PD98059 and the c-Jun N-terminal kinase inhibitor SP600125. These findings suggested that the mechanism of IL-1beta-induced-sAPP(alpha) release is dependent on MEK1/2- and JNK-activated alpha-secretase cleavage in neuroglioma U251 cells.

Number:  432
UID:  15866047
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex', 'regulated']
Abstract:  Mutations in the presenilin genes (PS) account for most cases of familial Alzheimer's disease. PS contain the active site of the gamma-secretase complex that cleaves within the transmembrane domain of beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP). Full-length PS undergoes regulated endoproteolysis to produce fragments that comprise the active form of PS. The "presenilinase" responsible for endoproteolysis is unknown but may be the same presenilin-dependent gamma-secretase activity that cleaves APP. To investigate the mechanism of endoproteolysis, we examined sequence specificity at the cleavage site and tested whether PS dimers are important for endoproteolysis as well as gamma-secretase activity. No single point mutation, or a double mutation M292D/V293K, was able to completely abolish endoproteolysis and all mutants supported gamma-secretase activity. When wtPS1 was co-expressed with either M292D/V293K or D257A, it was unable to restore normal endoproteolysis to either mutant. Lack of transcleavage by wtPS1 suggests that PS1 endoproteolysis occurs via intramolecular cleavage and does not require dimerization.

Number:  433
UID:  15845357
Founded words:  ['interact', 'associated', 'interact']
Abstract:  Cathepsin-E is an endolysosomal aspartic proteinase and is predominantly expressed in immune system cells. Deficiency of cathepsin-E is associated with the development of atopic dermatitis, a pruritic inflammatory skin disease, which has put us to face a high selectivity challenge in the development of drugs for the therapy of Alzheimer's disease or breast cancer. This is because BACE1 (also known as beta-secretase) and cathepsin-D, both belonging to the family of aspartic proteinases, might interact with the same compound as cathepsin-E does. BACE1 is a putative prime therapeutic target for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease, and cathepsin-D a potential target for breast cancer. Accordingly, in the course of finding drugs against Alzheimer's disease or breast cancer by inhibiting BACE1 or cathepsin-D, the desired drugs should selectively inhibit only BACE1 or cathepsin-D, but definitely not cathepsin-E. To realize this, it is indispensable to find out the structural difference of the three enzymes. Since the crystal structures of BACE1 and cathepsin-D are already known, the lack of three-dimensional structure of cathepsin-E has become the bottleneck in this regard. In view of this, the three-dimensional structure of cathepsin-E has been developed. Although the overall structures of the three enzymes are quite similar to each other, some subtle difference around their active sites that distinguishes cathepsin-E from cathepsin-D and BACE1 has been revealed through an analysis of hydrogen bond network and microenvironment. The computed three-dimensional structure of cathepsin-E and the relevant findings might provide useful insights for designing inhibitors with the desired selectivity.

Number:  434
UID:  15833746
Founded words:  ['associated', 'mediated']
Abstract:  The voltage-gated sodium channel beta2-subunit (beta2) is a member of the IgCAM superfamily and serves as both an adhesion molecule and an auxiliary subunit of the voltage-gated sodium channel. Here we found that beta2 undergoes ectodomain shedding followed by presenilin (PS)-dependent gamma-secretase-mediated cleavage. 12-O-Tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate treatment or expression of an alpha-secretase enzyme, ADAM10, resulted in ectodomain cleavage of beta2 in Chinese hamster ovary cells. Subsequent cleavage of the remaining 15-kDa C-terminal fragment (beta2-CTF) was independently inhibited by three specific gamma-secretase inhibitors, expression of the dominant negative form of PS1, and in PS1/PS2 knock-out cells. gamma-Secretase inhibitor treatment also increased endogenous beta2-CTF levels in neuroblastoma cells and mouse primary neuronal cultures. In a cell-free gamma-secretase assay, we detected gamma-secretase activity-dependent generation of a 12 kDa beta2 intracellular domain (ICD), which was loosely associated with the membrane fraction. To assess the functional role of beta2 processing by gamma-secretase, we tested whether N-[N-(3,5-difluorophenylacetyl-l-alanyl)]-S-phenylglycine t-butylester (DAPT), a specific gamma-secretase inhibitor, would alter beta2-mediated cell adhesion and migration. We found that DAPT inhibited cell-cell aggregation and migration in a wound healing assay carried out with Chinese hamster ovary cells expressing beta2. DAPT also reduced migration of neuroblastoma cells in a modified Boyden chamber assay. Since DAPT treatment resulted in increased beta2-CTF levels, we also tested whether beta2-CTFs or beta2-ICDs would directly affect cell migration by overexpressing recombinant proteins. Interestingly, elevated levels of beta2-CTFs, but not ICDs, also blocked cell migration by 81 to 93%. Together, our findings show for the first time that beta2 is a PS/gamma-secretase substrate and gamma-secretase mediated cleavage of beta2-CTF is required for cell-cell adhesion and migration of beta2-expressing cells.

Number:  435
UID:  15814625
Founded words:  ['associated', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  The L1 adhesion molecule (CD171) is overexpressed in human ovarian and endometrial carcinomas and is associated with bad prognosis. Although expressed as a transmembrane molecule, L1 is released from carcinoma cells in a soluble form. Soluble L1 is present in serum and ascites of ovarian carcinoma patients. We investigated the mode of L1 cleavage and the function of soluble L1.

Number:  436
UID:  15814625
Founded words:  ['mediated']
Abstract:  We find that in ovarian carcinoma cells the constitutive cleavage of L1 proceeds in secretory vesicles. We show that apoptotic stimuli like C2-ceramide, staurosporine, UV irradiation, and hypoxic conditions enhance L1-vesicle release resulting in elevated levels of soluble L1. Constitutive cleavage of L1 is mediated by a disintegrin and metalloproteinase 10, but under apoptotic conditions multiple metalloproteinases are involved. L1 cleavage occurs in two types of vesicles with distinct density features: constitutively released vesicles with similarity to exosomes and apoptotic vesicles. Both types of L1-containing vesicles are present in the ascites fluids of ovarian carcinoma patients. Soluble L1 from ascites is a potent inducer of cell migration and can trigger extracellular signal-regulated kinase phosphorylation.

Number:  437
UID:  15814625
Founded words:  ['regulate', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  We suggest that tumor-derived vesicles may be an important source for soluble L1 that could regulate tumor cell function in an autocrine/paracrine fashion.

Number:  438
UID:  15778502
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activate']
Abstract:  The amyloid precursor protein (APP) is proteolytically processed by beta- and gamma-secretases to release amyloid beta, the main component in senile plaques found in the brains of patients with Alzheimer disease. Alternatively, APP can be cleaved within the amyloid beta domain by alpha-secretase releasing the non-amyloidogenic product sAPP alpha, which has been shown to have neuroprotective properties. Several G protein-coupled receptors are known to activate alpha-secretase-dependent processing of APP; however, the role of G protein-coupled nucleotide receptors in APP processing has not been investigated. Here it is demonstrated that activation of the G protein-coupled P2Y2 receptor (P2Y2R) subtype expressed in human 1321N1 astrocytoma cells enhanced the release of sAPP alpha in a time- and dose-dependent manner. P2Y2 R-mediated sAPP alpha release was dependent on extracellular calcium but was not affected by 1,2-bis(2-aminophenoxy)ethane-N,N,N,-trimethylammonium salt, an intracellular calcium chelator, indicating that P2Y2R-stimulated intracellular calcium mobilization was not involved. Inhibition of protein kinase C (PKC) with GF109203 or by PKC down-regulation with phorbol ester pre-treatment had no effect on UTP-stimulated sAPP alpha release, indicating a PKC-independent mechanism. U0126, an inhibitor of the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway, partially inhibited sAPPalpha release by UTP, whereas inhibitors of Src-dependent epidermal growth factor receptor transactivation by P2Y2Rs had no effect. The metalloprotease inhibitors phenanthroline and TAPI-2 and the furin inhibitor decanoyl-Arg-Val-Lys-Arg-chloromethylketone also diminished UTP-induced sAPP alpha release. Furthermore, small interfering RNA silencing of an endogenous adamalysin, ADAM10 or ADAM17/TACE, partially suppressed P2Y2R-activated sAPP alpha release, whereas treatment of cells with both ADAM10 and ADAM17/TACE small interfering RNAs completely abolished UTP-activated sAPP alpha release. These results may contribute to an understanding of the non-amyloidogenic processing of APP.

Number:  439
UID:  15777285
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex', 'regulated']
Abstract:  ProTGFalpha (transforming growth factor alpha precursor) maturation and conversion into soluble TGFalpha is a complex process that involves three proteolytic steps. One, that occurs co-translationally, eliminates the signal sequence. Another, occurring at the juxta-membrane domain, solubilizes TGFalpha. A third cleavage removes the N-terminal extension of proTGFalpha. This latter step has been poorly studied, mainly because of the rapid kinetics of this cleavage. In the present study, we have designed a strategy to analyse several aspects regarding this N-terminal cleavage. In vivo treatment with the hydroxamate-based metalloprotease inhibitors BB3103 or TAPI-2 (tumour necrosis factor-alpha protease inhibitor 2) reversibly induced accumulation of forms of proTGFalpha that included the N-terminal extension. N-terminal shedding was rapid, and occurred at the cell surface. However, the machinery responsible for the N-terminal cleavage was inactive in other cellular sites, such as the endoplasmic reticulum. Experiments of proTGFalpha expression and maturation in cells deficient in TACE (tumour-necrosis-factor-alpha-converting enzyme) activity indicated that this protease was dispensable for N-terminal processing of proTGFalpha in vivo, but was required for regulated cleavage at the C-terminus. These findings indicate that TACE is not involved in N-terminal processing of proTGFalpha, and suggest differences in the machineries that control the cleavage at both ends of TGFalpha within its precursor.

Number:  440
UID:  15774577
Founded words:  ['regulating', 'regulate', 'regulating']
Abstract:  The requirement for notch signaling during vascular development is well-documented but poorly understood. Embryonic and adult endothelial cells (EC) express notch and notch ligands; however, the necessity for cell-autonomous notch signaling during angiogenesis has not been determined. During angiogenesis, EC display plasticity, whereby a subset of previously quiescent cells loses polarity and becomes migratory. To investigate the role of notch in EC, we have used a three-dimensional in vitro system that models all of the early steps of angiogenesis. We find that newly forming sprouts are composed of specialized tip cells that guide the sprout and trunk cells that proliferate and rearrange to form intercellular lumens. Furthermore, we find that notch acts cell-autonomously to suppress EC proliferation, thereby regulating tube diameter. In addition, when notch signaling is blocked, tip cells divide, and both daughter cells take on a tip cell phenotype, resulting in increased branching through vessel bifurcation. In contrast, notch signaling is not required for re-establishment of EC polarity or for lumen formation. Thus, notch is used reiteratively and cell-autonomously by EC to regulate vessel diameter, to limit branching at the tip of sprouts, and to establish a mature, quiescent phenotype.

Number:  441
UID:  15772078
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'mediates', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Increasing evidence suggests that the low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP) affects the processing of amyloid precursor protein (APP) and amyloid beta (Abeta) protein production as well as mediates the clearance of Abeta from the brain. Recent studies indicate that the cytoplasmic domain of LRP is critical for this modulation of APP processing requiring perhaps a complex between APP, the adaptor protein FE65, and LRP. In this study, we expressed a small LRP domain consisting of the C-terminal 97 amino acids of the cytoplasmic domain, or LRP-soluble tail (LRP-ST), in CHO cells to test the hypothesis that the APP.LRP complex can be disrupted. We anticipated that LRP-ST would inhibit the normal interaction between LRP and APP and therefore perturb APP processing to resemble a LRP-deficient state. Surprisingly, CHO cells expressing LRP-ST demonstrated an increase in both sAPP secretion and Abeta production compared with control CHO cells in a manner reminiscent of the cellular effects of the APP "Swedish mutation." The increase in sAPP secretion consisted mainly of sAPPbeta, consistent with the increase in Abeta release. Further, this effect is LRP-independent, as the same alterations remained when LRP-ST was expressed in LRP-deficient cells but not when the construct was membrane-anchored. Finally, deletion experiments suggested that the last 50 amino acid residues of LRP-ST contain the important domain for altering APP processing and Abeta production. These observations indicate that there are cellular pathways that may suppress Abeta generation but that can be altered to facilitate Abeta production.

Number:  442
UID:  15766262
Founded words:  ['association', 'associated', 'mediates', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Gamma-secretase mediates the final step, which generates Alzheimer's disease Abeta amyloid protein, by cleaving the transmembrane domain of the amyloid-beta protein precursor. Four gene products, presenilin, nicastrin, APH-1, and PEN-2, are required for gamma-secretase activity that is contained within a high molecular mass complex. To further characterize gamma-secretase, we probed membranes from human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells with gamma-secretase inhibitor biotin derivatives of L-685,458, pepstatin A, and the difluoro alcohol 1-Bt. These inhibitor derivatives bound and precipitated PS1 fragments from membrane CHAPSO extracts. Analysis of PS1 complexes by blue native gel electrophoresis and western blotting indicated that the CHAPSO extracts contained complexes of approximately 900, 500, and 400 kDa. With this technique, derivatives of the three inhibitors were detected only in association with the 900 kDa species. Size-exclusion chromatography showed that 13% of PS1 immunoreactivity extracted with CHAPSO was comprised within a >or=900 kDa species with the remaining eluting in fractions of 669-250 kDa but that most enzymatic activity was associated with the 900 kDa fractions. After treatment with L-685,458 inhibitor, 49% PS1 immunoreactivity was eluted in the 900 kDa fraction, supporting evidence that the inhibitor stabilized this complex. Subcellular fractionation of SH-SY5Y cells indicated that the 900 kDa complex was formed as PS1 and NCT matured through the secretory pathway and that enzymatic activity correlated with complex maturation. From these observations, we propose a model for the structure of active gamma-secretase that would consist of dimerization of 400-500 kDa subunits and be consistent with the apparent molecular mass of the complex.

Number:  443
UID:  15763173
Founded words:  ['interact', 'interact', 'binding', 'bind', 'binding', 'bind', 'regulating', 'regulation', 'regulatory', 'regulation', 'regulating']
Abstract:  Presenilin/gamma-secretase is a membrane-associated protease that cleaves within the transmembrane region of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) to generate amyloid-beta peptide (Abeta) whose deposition in the brain is a characteristic of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Calsenilin, a calcium binding protein that has been shown to interact with the C-termini of both presenilin 1 (PS1) and presenilin 2 (PS2), appears to play a role in transcriptional regulation and apoptosis and to bind to A-type voltage-gated potassium channels. Here, we report that overexpression of calsenilin enhanced gamma-secretase activity in cells. The effect of calsenilin on the gamma-cleavage of substrates was blocked by the selective gamma-secretase inhibitor L-685,458. We also employed a cellular gamma-cleavage GFP-reporter assay to demonstrate the effect of calsenilin on gamma-secretase activity. To establish a direct role for calsenilin in regulating gamma-secretase activity, we incubated purified calsenilin with isolated membrane fractions and found increased Abeta production in a cell free system. These data suggest that calsenilin may be one of the regulatory factors for gamma-secretase.

Number:  444
UID:  15749709
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'interacts', 'interact', 'association', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interacts', 'interact']
Abstract:  BACE is a transmembrane protease with beta-secretase activity that cleaves the amyloid precursor protein (APP). After BACE cleavage, APP becomes a substrate for gamma-secretase, leading to release of amyloid-beta peptide (Abeta), which accumulates in senile plaques in Alzheimer disease. APP and BACE are co-internalized from the cell surface to early endosomes. APP is also known to interact at the cell surface and be internalized by the low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP), a multifunctional endocytic and signaling receptor. Using a new fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET)-based assay of protein proximity, fluorescence lifetime imaging (FLIM), and co-immunoprecipitation we demonstrate that the light chain of LRP interacts with BACE on the cell surface in association with lipid rafts. Surprisingly, the BACE-LRP interaction leads to an increase in LRP C-terminal fragment, release of secreted LRP in the media and subsequent release of the LRP intracellular domain from the membrane. Taken together, these data suggest that there is a close interaction between BACE and LRP on the cell surface, and that LRP is a novel BACE substrate.

Number:  445
UID:  15746097
Founded words:  ['activating', 'activate', 'mediated', 'regulating', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulating', 'regulates']
Abstract:  Transmembrane receptors typically transmit cellular signals following growth factor stimulation by coupling to and activating downstream signaling cascades. Reports of proteolytic processing of cell surface receptors to release an intracellular domain (ICD) has raised the possibility of novel signaling mechanisms directly mediated by the receptor ICD. The receptor tyrosine kinase ERBB4/HER4 (referred to here as ERBB4) undergoes sequential processing by tumor necrosis factor-alpha converting enzyme and presenilin-dependent gamma-secretase to release the ERBB4 ICD (4ICD). Our recent data suggests that regulation of gene expression by the ERBB4 nuclear protein and the proapoptotic activity of ERBB4 involves the gamma-secretase release of 4ICD. To determine the role gamma-secretase processing plays in ERBB4 signaling, we generated an ERBB4 allele with the transmembrane residue substitution V673I (ERBB4-V673I). We demonstrate that ERBB4-V673I fails to undergo processing by gamma-secretase but retains normal cell surface signaling activity. In contrast to wild-type ERBB4, however, ERBB4-V673I was excluded from the nuclei of transfected cells and failed to activate STAT5A stimulation of the beta-casein promoter. These results support the contention that gamma-secretase processing of ERBB4 is necessary to release a functional 4ICD nuclear protein which directly regulates gene expression. We also demonstrate that 4ICD failed to accumulate within mitochondria of ERBB4-V673I transfected cells and the potent proapoptotic activity of ERBB4 was completely abolished in cells expressing ERBB4-V673I. Our results provide the first formal demonstration that proteolytic processing of ERBB4 is a critical event regulating multiple receptor signaling activities.

Number:  446
UID:  15745965
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'associations', 'associated', 'interactions', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  The sequential enzymatic actions of beta-APP cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1), presenilins (PS), and other proteins of the gamma-secretase complex liberate beta-amyloid (Abeta) peptides from larger integral membrane proteins, termed beta-amyloid precursor proteins (APPs). Relatively little is known about the normal function(s) of APP or the neuronal compartment(s) in which APP undergoes proteolytic processing. Recent studies have been interpreted as consistent with the idea that APP serves as a kinesin-1 cargo receptor and that PS and BACE1 are associated with the APP-resident membranous cargos that undergo rapid axonal transport. In this report, derived from a collaboration among several independent laboratories, we examined the potential associations of APP and kinesin-1 using glutathione S-transferase pull-down and coimmunoprecipitation assays. In addition, we assessed the trafficking of membrane proteins in the sciatic nerves of transgenic mice with heterozygous or homozygous deletions of APP. In contrast to previous reports, we were unable to find evidence for direct interactions between APP and kinesin-1. Furthermore, the transport of kinesin-1 and tyrosine kinase receptors, previously reported to require APP, was unchanged in axons of APP-deficient mice. Finally, we show that two components of the APP proteolytic machinery, i.e., PS1 and BACE1, are not cotransported with APP in the sciatic nerves of mice. These findings suggest that the hypothesis that APP serves as a kinesin-1 receptor and that the proteolytic processing machinery responsible for generating Abeta is transported in the same vesicular compartment in axons of peripheral nerves requires revision.

Number:  447
UID:  15743924
Founded words:  ['association']
Abstract:  The efficacy of gamma-secretase inhibitors in vivo has, to date, been generally assessed in transgenic mouse models expressing increased levels of amyloid-beta (Abeta) peptide thereby allowing the detection of changes in Abeta production. However, it is not clear whether the in vivo potency of gamma-secretase inhibitors is independent of the level of amyloid precursor protein expression. In other words, does a gamma-secretase inhibitor have the same effect in nontransgenic physiological animals versus transgenic overexpressing animals? In the present study, an immunoassay has been developed which can detect Abeta(40) in the rat brain, where concentrations are much lower than those seen in transgenic mice such as Tg2576 (c. 0.7 and 25 nM, respectively) and in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF, c. 0.3 nM). Using this immunoassay, the effects of the gamma-secretase inhibitor LY-411575 [N(2)-[(2S)-2-(3,5-difluorophenyl)-2-hydroxyethanoyl]-N(1)-[(7S)-5-methyl-6-oxo-6,7-dihydro-5H-dibenzo[b,d]azepin-7-yl]-L-alaninamide] were assessed and robust dose-dependent reductions in rat brain and CSF Abeta(40) levels were observed with ID(50) values of 1.3 mg/kg for both brain and CSF. These values were comparable with those calculated for LY-411575 in transgenic mice. Time course experiments using LY-411575 demonstrated comparable temporal reductions in rat brain and CSF Abeta(40), further suggesting these two pools of Abeta are related. Accordingly, when all the data for the dose-response curve and time course were correlated, a strong association was observed between the brain and CSF Abeta(40) levels. These data demonstrate the utility of the rat as a novel approach for assessing the effects of gamma-secretase inhibitors on central nervous system Abeta(40) levels in vivo.

Number:  448
UID:  15722417
Founded words:  ['bind', 'bind', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  gamma-Secretase is a structurally enigmatic multiprotein complex that catalyzes intramembrane proteolysis of a variety of substrates, including the amyloid beta-protein precursor of Alzheimer's disease and the Notch receptor essential to cell differentiation. The active site of this transmembrane aspartyl protease apparently lies at the interface between two subunits of presenilin-1 (PS1); however, evidence suggests the existence of an initial substrate-binding site that is distinct from the active site. Here, we report that photoaffinity probes based on potent helical peptide inhibitors and designed to mimic the amyloid beta-protein precursor substrate bind specifically to the PS subunit interface, at a site close to the active site. The location of the helical peptide-binding site suggests that substrate passes between the two PS1 subunits to access the active site. An aggressive Alzheimer-causing mutation in PS1 strongly reduced photolabeling by a transition-state analogue but not by helical peptides, providing biochemical evidence that the pathological effect of this PS mutation is due to alteration of the active-site topography.

Number:  449
UID:  15722349
Founded words:  ['interacts', 'interacts', 'bind', 'binds', 'binds', 'bind']
Abstract:  The amyloidogenic pathway leading to the production and deposition of Abeta peptides, major constituents of Alzheimer disease senile plaques, is linked to neuronal metal homeostasis. The amyloid precursor protein binds copper and zinc in its extracellular domain, and the Abeta peptides also bind copper, zinc, and iron. The first step in the generation of Abeta is cleavage of amyloid precursor protein by the aspartic protease BACE1. Here we show that BACE1 interacts with CCS (the copper chaperone for superoxide dismutase-1 (SOD1)) through domain I and the proteins co-immunoprecipitate from rat brain extracts. We have also been able to visualize the co-transport of membranous BACE1 and soluble CCS through axons. BACE1 expression reduces the activity of SOD1 in cells consistent with direct competition for available CCS as overexpression of CCS restores SOD1 activity. Finally, we demonstrate that the twenty-four residue C-terminal domain of BACE1 binds a single Cu(I) atom with high affinity through cysteine residues.

Number:  450
UID:  15721236
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  A combination of genetic factors and early life events is thought to determine the vulnerability of an individual to develop a complex neurodevelopmental disorder like schizophrenia. Pharmacogenetically selected, apomorphine-susceptible Wistar rats (APO-SUS) display a number of behavioral and pathophysiological features reminiscent of such disorders. Here, we report microarray analyses revealing in APO-SUS rats, relative to their counterpart APO-UNSUS rats, a reduced expression of Aph-1b, a component of the gamma-secretase enzyme complex that is involved in multiple (neuro)developmental signaling pathways. The reduced expression is due to a duplicon-based genomic rearrangement event resulting in an Aph-1b dosage imbalance. The expression levels of the other gamma-secretase components were not affected. However, gamma-secretase cleavage activity was significantly changed, and the APO-SUS/-UNSUS Aph-1b genotypes segregated with a number of behavioral phenotypes. Thus, a subtle imbalance in the expression of a single, developmentally important protein may be sufficient to cause a complex phenotype.

Number:  451
UID:  15718241
Founded words:  ['association']
Abstract:  The use of statins, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase inhibitors that block the synthesis of mevalonate (and downstream products such as cholesterol and nonsterol isoprenoids), as a therapy for Alzheimer disease is currently the subject of intense debate. It has been reported that statins reduce the risk of developing the disorder, and a link between cholesterol and Alzheimer disease pathophysiology has been proposed. Moreover, experimental studies focusing on the cholesterol-dependent effects of statins have demonstrated a close association between cellular cholesterol levels and amyloid production. However, evidence suggests that statins are pleiotropic, and the potential cholesterol-independent effects of statins on amyloid precursor protein (APP) metabolism and amyloid beta-peptide (A beta) genesis are unknown. In this study, we developed a novel in vitro system that enabled the discrete analysis of cholesterol-dependent and -independent (i.e. isoprenoid-dependent) statin effects on APP cleavage and A beta formation. Given the recent interest in the role that intracellular A beta may play in Alzheimer disease, we analyzed statin effects on both secreted and cell-associated A beta. As reported previously, low cellular cholesterol levels favored the alpha-secretase pathway and decreased A beta secretion presumably within the endocytic pathway. In contrast, low isoprenoid levels resulted in the accumulation of APP, amyloidogenic fragments, and A beta likely within biosynthetic compartments. Importantly, low cholesterol and low isoprenoid levels appeared to have completely independent effects on APP metabolism and A beta formation. Although the implications of these effects for Alzheimer disease pathophysiology have yet to be investigated, to our knowledge, these results provide the first evidence that isoprenylation is involved in determining levels of intracellular A beta.

Number:  452
UID:  15716592
Founded words:  ['association', 'association', 'associated', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Cholesterol has been implicated in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Although the underlying mechanisms are not yet clear, several studies have provided evidence for the involvement of cholesterol-rich lipid rafts in the production of amyloid beta peptide (Abeta), the major component of amyloid deposits in AD. In this regard, the gamma-secretase complex is responsible for the final cleavage event in the processing of beta-amyloid precursor protein (betaAPP), resulting in Abeta generation. The gamma-secretase complex is a multiprotein complex composed of presenilin, nicastrin (NCT), APH-1, and PEN-2. Recent reports have suggested that gamma-secretase activity is predominantly localized in lipid rafts, and presenilin and NCT have been reported to be localized in lipid rafts. In this study, various biochemical methods, including coimmunoprecipitation, in vitro gamma-secretase assay, and methyl-beta-cyclodextrin (MbetaCD) treatment, are employed to demonstrate that all four components of the active endogenous gamma-secretase complex, including APH-1 and PEN-2, are associated with lipid rafts in human neuroblastoma cells (SH-SY5Y). Treatment with statins, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA-reductase inhibitors, significantly decreased the association of the gamma-secretase complex with lipid rafts without affecting the distribution of flotillin-1. This effect was partially abrogated by the addition of geranylgeraniol. These results suggest that both cholesterol and protein isoprenylation influence the active gamma-secretase complex association with lipid rafts.

Number:  453
UID:  15715666
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  The structural requirements for presenilin (PS) to produce active presenilinase and gamma-secretase enzymes are poorly understood. Here we investigate the role the cytoplasmic C-terminal region of PS1 plays in PS1 activity. Deletion or addition of residues at the PS C-terminus has been reported to inhibit presenilinase endoproteolysis of PS and alter gamma-secretase activity. In this study, we use a sensitive assay in PS1/2KO MEFs to define a domain at the extreme C-terminus of PS1 that is essential for both presenilinase and gamma-secretase activities. Progressive deletion of the C-terminus demonstrated that removal of nine residues produces a PS1 molecule (458ST) that lacks both presenilinase processing and gamma-secretase cleavage of Notch and APP substrates. In contrast, removal of four or five residues had no effect (462ST, 463ST), while intermediate truncations partially inhibited PS1 activity. The 458ST mutant was unable to replace endogenous wtPS1 in HEK293 cells. Although 458ST was able to form a gamma-secretase complex, this complex was not matured, illustrated by mutant PS1 instability, lack of endoproteolysis, and little production of mature Nicastrin. These data indicate that the C-terminal end of PS1 is essential for Nicastrin trafficking and modification as well as the replacement of endogenous PS1 by PS1 transgenes.

Number:  454
UID:  15715652
Founded words:  ['activation', 'interactions', 'interacts', 'interacts', 'interacts', 'interactions', 'interacts', 'interacts', 'interacts', 'complex', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complex']
Abstract:  The activity of the gamma-secretase complex is critical for the processing of a number of transmembrane proteins, including Notch. Functional gamma-secretase activity can be reconstituted from four proteins--presenilin, nicastrin, Pen-2 and Aph-1--but the role of the individual proteins remains unclear. In this report we describe the cellular localization and protein interactions of Aph-1, with particular regard to Notch receptor processing. We found that Aph-1 is present at the cell surface, where it interacts with Pen-2, the mature forms of presenilin and nicastrin, and full-length Notch. Aph-1 also interacts with a truncated form of Notch, which is a direct substrate for gamma-secretase, but not with the Notch intracellular domain. Immunoprecipitation data for Notch and Aph-1 showed that the Notch-containing gamma-secretase complexes most likely form a small subset of the total number of gamma-secretase complexes. In conclusion, these data demonstrate that Aph-1 is present at the cell surface, presumably in active gamma-secretase complexes, and interacts with the Notch receptor, both before and after ligand activation.

Number:  455
UID:  15703394
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activation', 'regulated']
Abstract:  The intracellular domain of the p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75ICD) can be released by gamma-secretase in response to the previous activation of alpha-secretase by phorbol esters. However, ligand-dependent release of p75ICD has yet to be described. We show here that nerve growth factor can induce the release of p75ICD and facilitate its translocation to the nucleus in a gamma-secretase-dependent manner. This effect was observed in RN22 schwannoma cells cultured under serum-free conditions, as well as in Schwann cells, and it was mimicked by other neurotrophins, such as brain-derived neurotrophic factor or neurotrophin-3. Unlike other known examples of regulated intramembrane proteolysis, ligand-dependent release of p75ICD did not need the previous activation of alpha-secretase. These results suggest that nuclear translocation of p75ICD may represent a novel neurotrophin-mediated signaling pathway.

Number:  456
UID:  15695338
Founded words:  ['activator', 'interact', 'interact', 'interact', 'interact']
Abstract:  Cerebral accumulation of the amyloid beta-peptide (Abeta) is believed to play a key role in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Because Abeta is produced from the proteolysis of amyloid beta-protein precursor (APP) by beta-and gamma-secretases, these enzymes are considered important drug targets for AD. The authors have developed a luciferase-based reporter system that can identify new molecules that inhibit APP processing in a high-throughput manner. Such molecules can help in understanding the biology of APP and APP processing and in developing new drug prototypes for AD. In this system, APP is fused on its C-terminus with Gal4-VP16, a chimeric yeast-viral transcription activator, and luciferase is under control of the yeast Gal4 promoter. Compounds that modulate the luciferase signal may affect the secretases directly, interact with modifiers of these proteases, or interact with APP directly. The authors successfully interfaced this assay with a high-throughput screen, testing approximately 60,000 compounds with diverse chemical structures. In principle, this sensitive, specific, and quantitative assay may be useful for identifying both inhibitors and stimulators of APP processing.

Number:  457
UID:  15694266
Founded words:  ['activator']
Abstract:  In the processing of APP, alpha- and beta-secretase pathways compete with each other for cleaving APP. Therefore, physiologically these two secretases are likely to colocalize in the same subcellular compartments. Previously beta-secretase cleavage of APP was found in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). We herein tested whether alpha-secretase cleavage is also detected in the ER. We used experimental system of COS7 cells transfected with cDNA encoding human APP695, and the cell lysates and media were examined for its proteolytic products. When APP expression is concentrated in the ER by BFA-mediated transport inhibition or by using mutant APP harboring an ER-retrieval motif, alpha-secretase product sAPPalpha was accumulated in the cells. Immunofluorescence microscopy revealed that the ER-targeted APP produced intracellular accumulation of sAPPalpha, colocalizing with an ER marker. These results indicate that alpha-secretase cleavage of APP occurs in the ER. Further we examined the effects of phorbol ester PDBu, a direct activator of PKC, on the alpha-secretase and beta-secretase cleavages of APP occurring in the ER. Treatment with PDBu of COS7 cells transfected with the ER-targeted APP increased production of sAPPalpha and conversely decreased production of beta-secretase product sAPPbeta. Thus, in the ER, alpha-secretase competes with beta-secretase for cleaving APP and such competitive correlation might modulate the production of Abeta42 found in this compartment.

Number:  458
UID:  15681800
Founded words:  ['regulation', 'regulation', 'regulated', 'regulated']
Abstract:  Deposition of amyloid beta protein in the brain is the major pathological feature of Alzheimer's disease. Amyloid beta protein is generated from beta-amyloid precursor protein by beta-secretase and gamma-secretase. Proteolytic processing of amyloid precursor protein at the beta site by BACE1 is essential to generate amyloid beta protein. BACE1, the major beta-secretase involved in cleaving amyloid precursor protein, has been identified as a type 1 membrane-associated aspartyl protease. In this study, we found that BACE1 gene expression is controlled by a TATA-less promoter. BACE1 gene expression is tightly regulated at the transcriptional level and the transcription factor Sp1 plays an important role in regulation of BACE1 to process amyloid precursor protein generating amyloid beta protein. Furthermore, we found that BACE1 protein is ubiquitinated, and the degradation of BACE1 proteins and amyloid precursor protein processing are regulated by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway.

Number:  459
UID:  15667924
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  For years, scientists investigating amyloid precursor protein (APP) have focused on its pathogenetic role in the brains of Alzheimer's disease patients. Now, a study by Caille et al. adds new sites of action and new physiological functions for APP. They show that there are binding sites for secreted N-terminal nonamyloidogenic APP (sAPP) on epidermal growth factor (EGF)-responsive neural stem cells in the subventricular zone of the adult brain, where sAPP acts as an EGF cofactor to stimulate proliferation of these cells. This result opens the hypothesis that changes in the levels of sAPP could influence activity of the neurogenic regions of the adult brain in normal and pathological conditions.

Number:  460
UID:  15659814
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interacts', 'interact', 'interactions', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interacts', 'interact', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  The amyloid precursor protein (APP) is a cell surface protein with a large extracellular N-terminal domain, a single transmembrane segment, and a short cytoplasmic tail. Its location and structural features are characteristic of a receptor for signal transduction. Yet, the physiological function of APP is unclear, although it is well documented that APP's proteolytic processing, through the formation of membrane-bound C-terminal fragments (CTFs) and of beta-amyloid peptides, likely influences the development of Alzheimer's disease (AD). There is evidence that BACE1 is the enzyme responsible for beta-site cleavage of the APP and for the generation of CTFs. BACE1 expression is upregulated in AD brain, and we have recently shown in human brain and in vitro that BACE product CTFs, when phosphorylated in tyrosine residues, interact with the adaptor proteins ShcA and Grb2, which usually are involved in signal transduction pathways. We investigated the interaction between ShcA, APP, and CTFs in the H4 human cell line that overexpresses BACE1 to clarify the significance of such interactions in vitro and for AD generation. Our result show that the APP, CTF, and ShcA interaction is induced only upon overexpression of BACE1 either transiently or in stable cell lines. In particular, although BACE1 drives the formation of C99 and C89 CTFs, only C99 interacts with the ShcA adaptor protein. Therefore, our data suggest that BACE1 activity influences APP processing and its intracellular signaling through the ShcA adaptor protein.

Number:  461
UID:  15659232
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activation', 'activation', 'activators', 'activating', 'mediator', 'mediate', 'mediate', 'regulate']
Abstract:  4-Hydroxynonenal (HNE), an aldehydic product of lipid peroxidation, up-regulates expression of the beta-site APP cleaving enzyme (BACE-1), an aspartyl protease responsible for the beta-secretase cleavage of amyloid precursor protein (AbetaPP), and results in increased levels of amyloid beta (Abeta) peptide. The mechanisms underlying this remain unclear but are of fundamental importance because prevention of BACE-1 up-regulation is viewed as an important therapeutic strategy. In this study, we exposed NT(2) neurons to a range of HNE concentrations (0.5-5 microm) that elicited an up-regulation of BACE-1 expression, a significant increase in intracellular and secreted levels of Abeta peptides as well as apoptosis involving poly-ADP ribose polymerase cleavage and activation of caspase 3. To delineate the molecular events involved in HNE-mediated BACE-1 activation, we investigated the involvement of stress-activated protein kinases (SAPK), signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) and serine-threonine kinase B/phosphatidylinositol phosphate 3 kinase (Akt/PtdIns3K). Using specific pharmacological inhibitors, our results show that activation of c-Jun N-terminal kinases and p38(MAPK.), but not STAT or Akt/PtdIns3K, pathways mediate the HNE-dependent up-regulation of BACE-1 expression. Therefore, HNE, an oxidative stress mediator detected in vivo in the brains of Alzheimer's disease patients, may play a pathogenetic role in Alzheimer's disease by selectively activating SAPK pathways and BACE-1 that regulate the proteolytic processing of AbetaPP.

Number:  462
UID:  15615712
Founded words:  ['binds', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Memapsin 2 (BACE, beta-secretase) is a membrane-associated aspartic protease that initiates the hydrolysis of beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP) leading to the production of amyloid-beta (A beta) and the progression of Alzheimer disease. Both memapsin 2 and APP are transported from the cell surface to endosomes where APP is cleaved by memapsin 2. We described previously that the cytosolic domain of memapsin 2 contains an acid cluster-dileucine motif (ACDL) that binds the VHS (Vps-27, Hrs, and STAM) domain of Golgi-localized gamma-ear-containing ARF-binding (GGA) proteins (He, X., Zhu, G., Koelsch, G., Rodgers, K. K., Zhang, X. C., and Tang, J. (2003) Biochemistry 42, 12174-12180). Here we report that GGA proteins colocalize in the trans-Golgi network and endosomes with memapsin 2 and a memapsin 2 chimera containing a cytosolic domain of a mannose-6-phosphate receptor. Depleting cellular GGA proteins with RNA interference or mutation of serine 498 to stop the phosphorylation of ACDL resulted in the accumulation of memapsin 2 in early endosomes. A similar change of memapsin 2 localization also was observed when a retromer subunit, VPS26, was depleted. These observations suggest that GGA proteins function with the phosphorylated ACDL in the memapsin 2-recycling pathway from endosomes to trans-Golgi on the way back to the cell surface.

Number:  463
UID:  15614428
Founded words:  ['activate']
Abstract:  Alzheimer's Disease (AD) is the most common neurodegenerative disorder leading to dementia and its prevalence increases with age. The pathological features of AD are characterized by the beta-amyloid protein (A(beta)) deposits in the core of neuritic plaques and abnormal neurofibrillary tangles in the brain of AD patients. BACE1 is the major beta-secretase to cleave the beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP) to generate A(beta). Oxidative stress has been shown to affect A(beta) generation in the AD pathogenesis and the mechanism of such effect is unknown. In this report we generated a novel promoterless enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) reporter gene cloning vector and cloned a 1.9-kb BACE1 gene promoter fragment in this vector. The BACE1 promoter fragment can efficiently activate EGFP or luciferase gene transcription. Oxidative stress induced by hydrogen peroxide resulted in significant increase in the BACE1 promoter activity. Furthermore, hydrogen peroxide treatment facilitated beta-secretase activity and A(beta) generation. Thus, upregulation of BACE1 transcription by oxidative stress may contribute to the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease.

Number:  464
UID:  15613471
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complexes', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'function', 'function', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Presenilins appear to form the active center of gamma-secretase but require the presence of the integral membrane proteins nicastrin, anterior pharynx defective 1, and presenilin enhancer 2 for catalytic function. We have simultaneously overexpressed all of these polypeptides, and we demonstrate functional assembly of the enzyme complex, a substantial increase in enzyme activity, and binding of all components to a transition state analogue gamma-secretase inhibitor. Co-localization of all components can be observed in the Golgi compartment, and further trafficking of the individual constituents seems to be dependent on functional assembly. Apart from its catalytic function, gamma-secretase appears to play a role in the trafficking of the beta-amyloid precursor protein, which was changed upon reconstitution of the enzyme but unaffected by pharmacological inhibition. Because the relative molecular mass and stoichiometry of the active enzyme complex remain elusive, we performed size exclusion chromatography of solubilized gamma-secretase, which yielded evidence of a tetrameric form of the complex, yet almost completely abolished enzyme activity. Gamma-secretase activity was reconstituted upon addition of an independent size exclusion chromatography fraction of lower molecular mass and nonproteinaceous nature, which could be replaced by a brain lipid extract. The same treatment was able to restore enzyme activity after immunoaffinity purification of the gamma-secretase complex, demonstrating that lipids play a key role in preserving the catalytic activity of this protease. Furthermore, these data show that it is important to discriminate between intact, inactive gamma-secretase complexes and the active form of the enzyme, indicating the care that must be taken in the study of gamma-secretase.

Number:  465
UID:  15611067
Founded words:  ['associated', 'mediated', 'regulated', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  The recently described protocadherin gene clusters encode cadherin-related proteins, which are highly expressed in the vertebrate nervous system. Here, we report biochemical studies addressing proteolytic processing of gamma-protocadherins. These type-I transmembrane proteins are cleaved by a metalloproteinase in vivo, generating a soluble extracellular fragment and a carboxyl-terminal fragment associated with the cellular membrane. In addition, we show that the carboxyl-terminal fragment is a substrate for further cleavage mediated by presenilin. Consequently, accumulation of the fragment is found when gamma-secretase is inactivated either by the specific presenilin-inhibitor L685,458 or in double mutant murine embryonic fibroblasts lacking both presenilin genes. The gamma-secretase-generated carboxyl-terminal fragment is largely unstable but accumulates when proteasomal degradation is inhibited. Interestingly, the proteolytic fragment generated by gamma-secretase can localize to the nucleus. This is the first report providing experimental evidence for a cell surface receptor signaling function of protocadherins regulated by proteolytic events.

Number:  466
UID:  15606899
Founded words:  ['interacting', 'interacting', 'interact', 'interacting', 'interacting', 'interact']
Abstract:  Using a yeast two-hybrid system, we screened a human brain cDNA library for possible interacting proteins with the C-terminal cytosolic tail of the beta-secretase beta-amyloid protein converting enzyme (BACE)1. This identified seven potential candidates, including the brain-specific type II membrane protein BRI3. Co-localization and co-immunoprecipitation experiments confirmed that BACE1 and BRI3 co-localize and interact with each other via the cytosolic tail of BACE1. Furthermore, pulse and pulse-chase analyses revealed that the pro-protein convertases furin, and to a lesser extent PC7 and PC5A, process BRI3 into a C-terminal secreted approximately 4-kDa product. Thus, furin efficiently processes both pro-BACE1 and its novel interacting protein pro-BRI3.

Number:  467
UID:  15592359
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activation', 'activation', 'mediated', 'regulate']
Abstract:  The amyloid precursor protein (APP) has been suggested to regulate gene expression. GeneChip analysis and in vitro kinase assays revealed potent APP-dependent repression of c-Jun, its target gene SPARC and reduced basal c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) activity in PC12 cells overexpressing APP. UV-induced activation of the JNK signalling pathway and subsequent apoptosis were likewise reduced by APP and this effect could be mimicked by the indirect JNK inhibitor CEP-11004. Treatment with a gamma-secretase inhibitor did not affect APP-mediated downmodulation of the JNK signalling pathway, suggesting that the effects might be mediated via alpha-secretase processing of APP. In support of these data, overexpression of the Swedish mutant of APP did not inhibit SPARC expression, UV-induced JNK activation and cell death. Our data suggest an important physiological role of APP and alpha-secretase activity in the control of JNK/c-Jun signalling, target gene expression and cell death activation in response to cytotoxic stress.

Number:  468
UID:  15591316
Founded words:  ['associated', 'associated', 'binding', 'binding', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  gamma-Secretase is an aspartyl protease complex composed of the four core components APH-1, nicastrin (NCT), presenilin (PS), and PEN-2. It catalyzes the final intramembranous cleavage of the beta-secretase-processed beta-amyloid precursor protein to liberate the neurotoxic amyloid beta-peptide. Whereas unassembled complex components appear to be unstable and/or to be retained within the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), the fully assembled complex is known to exert its biological function in late secretory compartments, including the plasma membrane. We thus hypothesized that the gamma-secretase complex undergoes a stepwise assembly within the ER. We demonstrate that gamma-secretase-associated NCT can be actively retained within the ER by the addition of a retention signal. Under these conditions, complex assembly occurred in the absence of maturation of NCT, and ER-retained immature NCT associated with APH-1, PEN-2, and PS fragments. Moreover, a biotinylated transition state gamma-secretase inhibitor allowed the preferential isolation of the fully assembled complex containing immature NCT. Furthermore, we observed a conformational change in immature NCT, which is known to be selectively associated with complete gamma-secretase complex assembly. This was also observed for a small amount of immature endogenous NCT. ER-retained NCT also rescued the biochemical phenotype observed upon RNA interference-mediated NCT knockdown, viz. reduced amyloid beta-peptide production; instability of PS, PEN-2, and APH-1; and accumulation of beta-amyloid precursor protein C-terminal fragments. Finally, we demonstrate that dimeric (NCT/APH-1) and trimeric (NCT/APH-1/PS) intermediates of gamma-secretase complex assembly containing endogenous NCT are retained within the ER and that the incorporation of the fourth and last binding partner (PEN-2) also occurs on immature NCT, suggesting a complete assembly of the gamma-secretase complex within the ER.

Number:  469
UID:  15584902
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  Beta-amyloid peptides (Abeta) are produced by a sequential cleavage of amyloid precursor protein (APP) by beta- and gamma-secretases. The lack of Abeta production in beta-APP cleaving enzyme (BACE1)(-/-) mice suggests that BACE1 is the principal beta-secretase in mammalian neurons. Transfection of human APP and BACE1 into neurons derived from wild-type and BACE1(-/-) mice supports cleavage of APP at the canonical beta-secretase site. However, these studies also revealed an alternative BACE1 cleavage site in APP, designated as beta', resulting in Abeta peptides starting at Glu11. The apparent inability of human BACE1 to make this beta'-cleavage in murine APP, and vice versa, led to the hypothesis that this alternative cleavage was species-specific. In contrast, the results from human BACE1 transgenic mice demonstrated that the human BACE1 is able to cleave the endogenous murine APP at the beta'-cleavage site. To address this discrepancy, we designed fluorescent resonance energy transfer peptide substrates containing the beta- and beta'-cleavage sites within human and murine APP to compare: (i) the enzymatic efficiency; (ii) binding kinetics of a BACE1 active site inhibitor LY2039911; and (iii) the pharmacological profiles for human and murine recombinant BACE1. Both BACE1 orthologs were able to cleave APP at the beta- and beta'-sites, although with different efficiencies. Moreover, the inhibitory potency of LY2039911 toward recombinant human and native BACE1 from mouse or guinea pig was indistinguishable. In summary, we have demonstrated, for the first time, that recombinant BACE1 can recognize and cleave APP peptide substrates at the postulated beta'-cleavage site. It does not appear to be a significant species specificity to this cleavage.

Number:  470
UID:  15574741
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activating']
Abstract:  We investigated whether peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) could be involved in the modulation of the amyloid cascade causing Alzheimer's disease. Inducing expression or activating PPARgamma using synthetic agonists of the thiazolinedione family results in a dramatic decrease in the levels of the amyloid-beta (Abeta) peptide in the conditioned medium of neuronal and non-neuronal cells. PPARgamma does not affect expression or activity of any of the secretases involved in the generation of the Abeta peptide but induces a fast, cell-bound clearing mechanism responsible for the removal of the Abeta peptide from the medium. Although PPARgamma expression is generally low in the CNS, induction of PPARgamma expression during inflammation could be beneficial for inducing Abeta clearance. We confirm that the Abeta clearance mechanism can indeed be induced by PPARgamma activation in primary murine-mixed glia and cortical neuronal cultures. Our results suggest that PPARgamma-controlled mechanisms should be explored further as potential drug targets for Alzheimer's disease treatment.

Number:  471
UID:  15569674
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interacts', 'association', 'interaction', 'interacts', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'function', 'function', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Research on Alzheimer's disease led to the identification of a novel proteolytic mechanism in all metazoans, the presenilin/gamma-secretase complex. This unique intramembrane-cleaving aspartyl protease is required for the normal processing of Notch, Jagged, beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP), E-cadherin, and many other receptor-like proteins. We recently provided indirect evidence of gamma-secretase activity at the cell surface in HeLa cells following inhibition of receptor-mediated endocytosis. Here, we directly identify and isolate gamma-secretase as an intact complex (Presenilin, Nicastrin, Aph-1, and Pen-2) from the plasma membrane, both in overexpressing cell lines and endogenously. Inhibition of its proteolytic activity allowed cell surface gamma-secretase to be captured in association with its plasma membrane-localized APP substrates (C83 and C99). Moreover, non-denaturing isolation of the intact enzyme complex revealed that cell surface gamma-secretase can specifically generate amyloid beta-protein from an APP substrate and similarly cleave a Notch substrate. These data directly establish the proteolytic function of gamma-secretase on the plasma membrane, independent of a hypothesized substrate trafficking role. We conclude that presenilin/gamma-secretase exists as a mature complex at the cell surface, where it interacts with and can cleave its substrates, consistent with an essential function in processing many adhesion molecules and receptors required for cell-cell interaction or intercellular signaling.

Number:  472
UID:  15568990
Founded words:  ['regulation', 'regulatory', 'regulation', 'regulated']
Abstract:  Proteases can play key roles in regulation by controlling the levels of critical components of, for example, signal transduction pathways. Proteolytic processing can remove regulatory proteins when they are not needed, while transforming others from the dormant into the biologically active state. The latter mechanism often involves a subsequent change of cellular localization such as the movement from the membrane to the nucleus. The investigation of these processes has revealed a new type of proteolytic activity, regulated intramembrane proteolysis, and a reversible switch in activity occurring in the HtrA family of serine proteases. The bacterial RseA and the human amyloid precursor processing pathways are used as models to review these novel principles that are evolutionarily conserved and have wide biological implications.

Number:  473
UID:  15563588
Founded words:  ['associated', 'binds', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  gamma-Secretase activity is associated with a presenilin (PS)-containing macromolecular complex. Whether PS contains the active site of gamma-secretase has been controversial. One challenge is to find PS that is engaged in the active gamma-secretase complex at the cell surface, where some substrates appear to be processed. In this study, we developed an intact cell photolabeling technique that allows the direct visualization of active gamma-secretase at the cell surface. We demonstrated that active gamma-secretase is present in the plasma membrane. Moreover, the PS1 heterodimer is specifically photolabeled at the cell surface by a potent inhibitor that binds to only the active gamma-secretase. We also explored the cellular processing sites of gamma-secretase for amyloid precursor protein (APP) and Notch by using small molecular probes. MRL631, a gamma-secretase inhibitor that is unable to penetrate the cell membrane, significantly blocks gamma-secretase-mediated Notch cleavage but has little effect on APP processing. These results indicate that Notch is processed at the cell surface and that the majority of APP is processed by intracellular gamma-secretase. Furthermore, the fact that inhibitors first target gamma-secretase in the plasma membrane for Notch processing, and not for APP, will have important implications for drug development to treat Alzheimer's disease and cancer.

Number:  474
UID:  15548998
Founded words:  ['activated', 'associated']
Abstract:  Although constitutively activated forms of the NOTCH1 receptor are potent inducers of T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma when expressed in the bone marrow stem cells of mice, the known involvement of NOTCH1 in human T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma has been restricted to very rare tumors associated with a (7;9) chromosomal translocation involving the NOTCH1 gene. This picture has changed dramatically in the past year with the discovery of frequent mutations involving NOTCH1 in human T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma.

Number:  475
UID:  15541883
Founded words:  ['associated', 'complex', 'complex', 'function', 'function', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Studies conducted in cell culture indicate that the gamma-secretase involved in amyloid beta-formation and Notch signaling is a multisubunit aspartic protease. Little is known, however, of the structure, function, or localization of gamma-secretase in the adult brain, or possible effects of familial Alzheimer's disease (FAD)-causing mutations on the brain protease. We report here that mouse brain contains a complex composed of gamma-secretase subunits presenilin-1 N-terminal fragment, presenilin-1 C-terminal fragment, Nicastrin, Aph-1a and Pen-2. A homozygous FAD-linked Presenilin-1 knock-in mutation does not alter relative subunit levels. Immunocytochemical localization of gamma-secretase subunits revealed overlapping but distinct regional and subcellular distributions. All subunits are expressed throughout the neuraxis predominantly in neurons, and are present in axons. Their distributions and levels of expression are unaffected by mutant presenilin-1. In a presenilin-1/amyloid precursor protein double knock-in mouse, subunits are associated with plaques, but are expressed at similar levels in amyloid-rich and -poor regions. gamma-Secretase subunits are distributed much more extensively than circumscribed amyloid deposits, suggesting the importance of other factors for localized amyloid deposition. These results indicate a widespread neuronal function for gamma-secretase in the adult brain, and suggest the pathogenic mechanism of FAD-linked mutations does not involve alterations in the composition, expression or brain distribution of the protease. The subcellular localization of gamma-secretase subunits is consistent with a nerve terminal source for amyloid aggregates.

Number:  476
UID:  15540986
Founded words:  ['activation']
Abstract:  CD43 is a transmembrane molecule that contains a 123-aminoacids-long cytoplasmic tail and a highly O-glycosylated extracellular domain of mucin type. Endogenous CD43 expressed in COLO 205, K562 and Jurkat cells revealed a membrane-associated, 20 kDa CD43-specific cytoplasmic tail fragment (CD43-CTF) upon inhibition of gamma-secretase. This fragment was formed by an extracellular cleavage, as it was not accumulated after treating cells with 1,10-phenanthroline, a metalloprotease inhibitor. When CD43 was transfected into HEK-293 cells expressing dominant-negative PS1 (presenilin-1), the CD43-CTF was accumulated, but not in cells with wild-type PS1. Owing to its accumulation in the presence of a non-functional PS variant, it may thus be a novel gamma-secretase substrate. This CTF is formed by an extracellular cleavage close to the membrane, is a fragment that can be concluded to be a substrate for gamma-secretase. However, the intracellular gamma-secretase product has not been possible to detect, suggesting a quick processing of this product. During normal growth the CTF was not found without gamma-secretase inhibition, but when the cells (COLO 205) were very confluent the fragment could be detected. The intracellular domain of CD43 has previously been shown to contain a functional nuclear localization signal, and has been suggested to be involved in gene activation. From this and the present results, a novel way to explain how mucin-type molecules may transduce intracellular signals can be proposed.

Number:  477
UID:  15537629
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'mediate', 'mediating', 'mediate', 'complex', 'complexes', 'complex', 'regulatory', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Macromolecular complexes containing presenilins (PS), nicastrin (NCT), APH-1, and PEN-2 mediate the gamma-secretase cleavage of the beta-amyloid precursor protein and Notch. APH-1 and NCT stabilize the PS1 holoprotein, whereas PEN-2 is critical for endoproteolysis of PS1. To define the structural domains of PEN-2 that are necessary for mediating PS1 endoproteolysis and gamma-secretase activity, we coexpressed APH-1, NCT, and PS1 together with a series of PEN-2 mutants, which harbored deletions in hydrophilic segments, or chimeric PEN-2 molecules that contained heterologous transmembrane domains (TMDs). We now report that with the exception of the PEN-2 variants with deletions proximal to the TMDs, the vast majority of the deletion variants were functional. Mutants that were nonfunctional were also unstable but were rescued by transposition of a heterologous sequence containing conservative amino acid substitutions into the deleted region. Notably, the carboxyl-terminal hydrophilic domain of PEN-2 was dispensable for promoting PS1 endoproteolysis but was critical for stabilizing the resulting PS1 derivatives. More importantly, we demonstrated that a chimeric PEN-2 with a replacement of the TMD2 with the TMD1 from sterol regulatory element binding protein 1 (SREBP-1) is fully functional but that a chimeric PEN-2 with a replacement of the TMD1 with the TMD2 from SREBP-1 is not. The function of this latter chimera was rescued by the replacement of the proximal two-thirds of the SREBP-1 TMD2 with the proximal two-thirds of the authentic TMD1 from PEN-2. These results suggest that the proximal two-thirds of the PEN-2 TMD1 is functionally important for endoproteolysis of PS1 holoproteins and the generation of PS1 fragments, essential components of the gamma-secretase complex.

Number:  478
UID:  15519759
Founded words:  ['mediators']
Abstract:  An increasing number of studies suggest that disturbances in cholesterol homeostasis may promote the formation and deposition of beta-amyloid (A beta) and the progression of Alzheimer's disease (AD). In this paper, we have analyzed the effect of the lipid-lowering compound rosuvastatin on apoptosis and caspase-3 activity in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells. Exposure of SH-SY5Y cells to A beta(1-42) alone resulted in a significantly increased caspase-3 activity approximately by 35% (135+/-15%, p<0.05), and decreased alpha-secretase activity by 34% (67.4+/-2.7%, p<0.001) compared to the controls (100+/-18.1%). Rosuvastatin alone decreased caspase-3 activity by 15% (85.3+/-1.5%, p<0.0005) compared to the controls and by 50% to cells exposed to A beta alone (p<0.00005). Cells exposed to rosuvastatin alone had a higher alpha-secretase activity compared to cells exposed to A beta (76.4+/-23.8%, n.s.) but a slightly lower activity compared to the controls (n.s.). Pre-treatment of SY-SY5Y cells with rosuvastatin prior to incubation with A beta(1-42) resulted in decreased caspase-3 activity by approximately 15% compared to the controls and by approximately 48% (86.8+/-16.9%, p<0.05) compared to cells treated with A beta(1-42) alone. Also, alpha-secretase activity was increased by approximately 50% compared to the controls and by 84% (151.3+/-10.1%, p<0.05), compared to cells treated with A beta(1-42) alone. Mevalonate abrogated the effect of rosuvastatin in vitro. To our knowledge, this is the first study demonstrating that the hydrophilic compound rosuvastatin decreases caspase-3 activity and increases alpha-secretase activity in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells exposed to A beta in vitro. These effects are essential for modulation of the amyloidogenic pathway and mediators of apoptosis in AD.

Number:  479
UID:  15485862
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Cleavage of the beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP) by the aspartyl protease beta-site APP-cleaving enzyme (BACE) is the first step in the generation of the amyloid beta-peptide, which is deposited in the brain of Alzheimer's disease patients. Whereas the subsequent cleavage by gamma-secretase was shown to originate from the cooperation of a multicomponent complex, it is currently unknown whether in a cellular environment BACE is enzymatically active as a monomer or in concert with other proteins. Using blue native gel electrophoresis we found that endogenous and overexpressed BACE has a molecular mass of 140 kDa instead of the expected mass of 70 kDa under denaturing conditions. This suggests that under native conditions BACE exists as a homodimer. Homodimerization was confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation of full-length BACE carrying different epitope tags. In contrast, the soluble active BACE ectodomain was exclusively present as a monomer both under native and denaturing conditions. A domain analysis revealed that the BACE ectodomain dimerized as long as it was attached to the membrane, whereas the cytoplasmic domain and the transmembrane domain were dispensable for dimerization. By adding a KKXX-endoplasmic reticulum retention signal to BACE, we demonstrate that dimerization of BACE occurs already before full maturation and pro-peptide cleavage. Furthermore, kinetic analysis of the purified native BACE dimer revealed a higher affinity and turnover rate in comparison to the monomeric soluble BACE. Dimerization of BACE might, thus, facilitate binding and cleavage of physiological substrates.

Number:  480
UID:  15474363
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Gamma-secretase is a high molecular weight protein complex composed of four subunits, namely, presenilin (PS; 1 or 2), nicastrin, anterior pharynx defective-1 (Aph-1; A or B), and presenilin enhancer-2 (Pen-2), and is responsible for the cleavage of a number of type-1 transmembrane proteins. A fundamental question is whether different gamma-secretase complexes exist in vivo. We demonstrate here by in situ hybridization and by Northern and Western blotting that the gamma-secretase components are widely distributed in all tissues investigated. The expression of the different subunits seems tightly coregulated. However, some variation in the expression of the Aph-1 proteins is observed, Aph-1A being more general and abundantly distributed than Aph-1B. The previously uncharacterized rodent-specific Aph-1C mRNA is highly expressed in the kidney and testis but not in brain or other tissues, indicating some tissue specificity for the Aph-1 component of the gamma-secretase complex. Blue-native electrophoresis revealed size heterogeneity of the mature gamma-secretase complex in various tissues. Using co-immunoprecipitations and blue-native electrophoresis at endogenous protein levels, we find evidence that several independent gamma-secretase complexes can coexist in the same cell type. In conclusion, our results suggest that gamma-secretase is a heterogeneous family of protein complexes widely expressed in the adult organism.

Number:  481
UID:  15473868
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activation', 'activation', 'associated', 'associated', 'associated', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Abeta (beta-amyloid) peptides are found aggregated in the cortical amyloid plaques associated with Alzheimer's disease neuropathology. Inhibition of the proteasome alters the amount of Abeta produced from APP (amyloid precursor protein) by various cell lines in vitro. Proteasome activity is altered during aging, a major risk factor for Alzheimer's disease. In the present study, a human neuroblastoma cell line expressing the C-terminal 100 residues of APP (SH-SY5Y-SPA4CT) was used to determine the effect of proteasome inhibition, by lactacystin and Bz-LLL-COCHO (benzoyl-Leu-Leu-Leu-glyoxal), on APP processing at the gamma-secretase site. Proteasome inhibition caused a significant increase in Abeta peptide levels in medium conditioned by SH-SY5Y-SPA4CT cells, and was also associated with increased cell death. APP is a substrate of the apoptosis-associated caspase 3 protease, and we therefore investigated whether the increased Abeta levels could reflect caspase activation. We report that caspase activation was not required for proteasome-inhibitor-mediated effects on APP (SPA4CT) processing. Cleavage of Ac-DEVD-AMC (N-acetyl-Asp-Glu-Val-Asp-7-amino-4-methylcoumarin), a caspase substrate, was reduced following exposure of SH-SY5Y-SPA4CT cells to lactacystin, and co-treatment of cells with lactacystin and a caspase inhibitor [Z-DEVD-FMK (benzyloxycarbonyl-Val-Ala-DL-Asp-fluoromethylketone)] resulted in higher Abeta levels in medium, augmenting those seen with lactacystin alone. This study indicated that proteasome inhibition could increase APP processing specifically at the gamma-secretase site, and increase release of Abeta, in the absence of caspase activation. This indicates that the decline in proteasome function associated with aging would contribute to increased Abeta levels.

Number:  482
UID:  15472075
Founded words:  ['activated', 'activating', 'regulates']
Abstract:  Very rare cases of human T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) harbor chromosomal translocations that involve NOTCH1, a gene encoding a transmembrane receptor that regulates normal T cell development. Here, we report that more than 50% of human T-ALLs, including tumors from all major molecular oncogenic subtypes, have activating mutations that involve the extracellular heterodimerization domain and/or the C-terminal PEST domain of NOTCH1. These findings greatly expand the role of activated NOTCH1 in the molecular pathogenesis of human T-ALL and provide a strong rationale for targeted therapies that interfere with NOTCH signaling.

Number:  483
UID:  15456788
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex', 'complexes', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  The gamma-secretase complex, consisting of presenilins (PS), nicastrin (NCT), APH-1, and PEN-2, catalyzes the intramembranous proteolysis of truncated beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP) and Notch derivatives to generate the APP intracellular domain (AICD) and Notch intracellular domain (NICD), respectively. To examine the intracellular sites in which active gamma-secretase resides, we expressed NCT variants harboring either an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) retention signal (NCT-ER) or a trans-Golgi network (TGN) targeting motif (NCT-TGN) along with PS1, APH-1, and PEN-2 and examined gamma-secretase activity in these settings. In cells expressing NCT-ER and the other components, PS1 fragments hyperaccumulated, but AICD levels were not elevated. On the other hand, upon coexpression of an ER-retained APP variant or a constitutionally active Notch mutant, NDeltaE, we observed enhanced production of AICD or NICD, respectively, in cells expressing NCT-ER. Moreover, we show that membranes from cells expressing NCT-ER, NCT-TGN, or NCT-WT contain identical levels of PS1 derivatives that can be photoaffinity cross-linked to a biotinylated, benzophenone-derivatized gamma-secretase inhibitor. Finally, our cell-free gamma-secretase assays revealed nearly equivalent gamma-secretase activities in cells expressing PS1, APH-1, PEN-2, and either NCT-WT or NCT-ER. Taken together, we interpret these findings as suggesting that active gamma-secretase complex is generated in the early compartments of the secretory pathway but that these complexes are transported to late compartments in which substrates are encountered and subsequently processed within respective transmembrane segments.

Number:  484
UID:  15452145
Founded words:  ['interacts', 'interacts', 'mediates']
Abstract:  Presenilin 1 (PS1) interacts with telencephalin (TLN) and the amyloid precursor protein via their transmembrane domain (Annaert, W.G., C. Esselens, V. Baert, C. Boeve, G. Snellings, P. Cupers, K. Craessaerts, and B. De Strooper. 2001. Neuron. 32:579-589). Here, we demonstrate that TLN is not a substrate for gamma-secretase cleavage, but displays a prolonged half-life in PS1(-/-) hippocampal neurons. TLN accumulates in intracellular structures bearing characteristics of autophagic vacuoles including the presence of Apg12p and LC3. Importantly, the TLN accumulations are suppressed by adenoviral expression of wild-type, FAD-linked and D257A mutant PS1, indicating that this phenotype is independent from gamma-secretase activity. Cathepsin D deficiency also results in the localization of TLN to autophagic vacuoles. TLN mediates the uptake of microbeads concomitant with actin and PIP2 recruitment, indicating a phagocytic origin of TLN accumulations. Absence of endosomal/lysosomal proteins suggests that the TLN-positive vacuoles fail to fuse with endosomes/lysosomes, preventing their acidification and further degradation. Collectively, PS1 deficiency affects in a gamma-secretase-independent fashion the turnover of TLN through autophagic vacuoles, most likely by an impaired capability to fuse with lysosomes.

Number:  485
UID:  15451669
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Human BACE, also known as beta-secretase, shows promise as a potential therapeutic target for Alzheimer's disease. We determined the apo structure of BACE to 1.75 A, and a structure of a hydroxyethylamine inhibitor complex derived by soaking. These show significant active-site movements compared to previously described BACE structures. Additionally, the structures reveal two pockets that could be targeted by structure-based drug design.

Number:  486
UID:  15448134
Founded words:  ['activating', 'regulatory']
Abstract:  Intramembrane cleaving proteases such as site 2 protease, gamma-secretase, and signal peptide peptidase hydrolyze peptide bonds within the transmembrane domain (TMD) of signaling molecules such as SREBP, Notch, and HLA-E, respectively. All three enzymes require a prior cleavage at the juxtamembrane region by another protease. It has been proposed that removing the extracellular domain allows dissociation of substrate TMD, held together by the extracellular domain or loop. Using gamma-secretase as a model intramembrane cleaving protease and Notch as a model substrate, we investigated whether activating and inactivating mutations in Notch modulate gamma-secretase cleavage through changes in oligomerization. We find that although the Notch epidermal growth factor repeats can promote dimer formation, most surface Notch molecules in mammalian cells are monomeric as are constitutively active or inactive Notch1 proteins. Using a bacterial assay for TM dimerization, we find that the isolated TMD of Notch and amyloid precursor protein self-associate and that mutations affecting Notch cleavage by gamma-secretase cleavage do not alter TMD dimerization. Our results indicate that ligand-induced reversal of controlled TMD dimerization by the Notch extracellular domain is unlikely to underlie the regulatory mechanism of intramembranous cleavage.

Number:  487
UID:  15347683
Founded words:  ['activators', 'activates', 'associated', 'mediate', 'mediate', 'regulating', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulate', 'regulating']
Abstract:  The deposition of the amyloid beta (Abeta) peptide in neuritic plaques plays a critical role in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Abeta is generated through the proteolysis of amyloid precursor protein (APP) by the sequential actions of beta- and gamma-secretases. Although recent evidence has unveiled much about the biochemical identity and characteristics of gamma-secretase, the mechanism regulating endogenous gamma-secretase activity remains elusive. To identify possible extracellular signals and associated signaling cascades that could regulate APP proteolysis by gamma-secretase activity, we have developed a cell-based reporter gene assay by stably cotransfecting HEK293 cells with the Gal4-driven luciferase reporter gene and the Gal4/VP16-tagged C-terminal fragment of APP (C99-GV), the immediate substrate of gamma-secretase. The cleavage of C99-GV by gamma-secretase releases the transcription factor that activates luciferase expression, providing a quantitative measurement of gamma-secretase activity. Using this reporter assay, we have demonstrated that interferon-gamma, interleukin-1beta, and tumor necrosis factor-alpha can specifically stimulate gamma-secretase activity, concomitant with increased production of Abeta and the intracellular domain of APP (AICD). The gamma-secretase-dependent cleavage of Notch is also enhanced upon the stimulation of these cytokines. The cytokine-enhanced gamma-secretase activity can be suppressed by a potent inhibitor of c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK). Furthermore, cells transfected with dominant-positive MEKK1, one of the most potent activators of the JNK cascade, exhibit increased gamma-secretase activity, suggesting that the JNK-dependent mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway could mediate the cytokine-elicited regulation of gamma-secretase. Our studies provide direct evidence that cytokine-elicited signaling cascades control Abeta production by modulating gamma-secretase activity.

Number:  488
UID:  15341520
Founded words:  ['activation', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interact', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interact', 'binding', 'binding', 'complex', 'complex', 'complexes', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulated', 'regulated']
Abstract:  The amyloid precursor protein (APP) is an ubiquitous receptor-like molecule involved in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). APP and some of its C-terminal proteolytic fragments (CTFs) have been shown to be phosphorylated and to interact with cytosolic phosphotyrosine binding (PTB) domain containing proteins involved in cell signaling and vesicular transport. Among others, the interaction between tyrosine-phosphorylated CTFs and ShcA-Grb2 adaptors is highly enhanced in AD brain. Here we have identified in SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells an interaction between APP holoprotein and the adaptor Grb2. Upon activation of apoptotic cell death this interaction is rapidly degraded, APP is partially cleaved and the complex APP/Grb2 is replaced by a new complex between CTFs and ShcA that still involves Grb2. The formation of these complexes is regulated by beta-site APP-cleaving enzyme 1 and influences the phosphorylation of mitogen-activated protein kinase p44/42 extracellular signal-regulated kinase as well as the level of apoptotic death of the cells. These data suggest a dual role in cell signaling for APP and its CTFs in neuroblastoma cells, in a manner similar to that previously reported for other tyrosine kinase receptor, through a tightly regulated coupling with alternative intracellular adaptors to control the signaling of the cell.

Number:  489
UID:  15341515
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  Gamma-secretase performs the final processing step in the generation of amyloid-beta (Abeta) peptides, which are believed to be causative for Alzheimer's disease. Presenilins (PS) are required for gamma-secretase activity and the presence of two essential intramembranous aspartates (D257 and D385) has implicated this region as the putative catalytic centre of an aspartyl protease. The presence of several key hydrogen-bonding residues around the active site of classical aspartyl proteases led us to investigate the role of both the critical aspartates and two nearby conserved hydrogen bond donors in PS1. Generation of cell lines stably overexpressing the D257E, D385E, Y256F and Y389F engineered mutations has enabled us to determine their role in enzyme catalysis and binding of a transition state analogue gamma-secretase inhibitor. Here we report that replacement of either tyrosine residue alters gamma-secretase cleavage specificity, resulting in an increase in the production of the more pathogenic Abeta42 peptide in both cells and membranous enzyme preparations, without affecting inhibitor binding. In contrast, replacement of either of the aspartate residues precludes inhibitor binding in addition to inactivation of the enzyme. Together, these data further incriminate the region around the intramembranous aspartates as the active site of the enzyme, targeted by transition state analogue inhibitors, and highlight the roles of individual residues.

Number:  490
UID:  15336962
Founded words:  ['function', 'function']
Abstract:  Mutations in presenilin-1 and 2 (PS) lead to increased intracellular calcium stores and an attenuation in the refilling mechanism known as capacitative calcium entry (CCE). Previous studies have shown that the mechanism by which PS modulates intracellular calcium signaling is dependent on gamma-secretase activity. Although the modulation of intracellular calcium signaling can lead to alterations in CCE, it is plausible that PS can also directly affect CCE independent of the effect it exerts on intracellular stores. To investigate this possibility, we studied the effects of the dominant negative variant of PS1 known as DeltaTM1-2, which lacks the first two transmembrane domains of PS1 and in which gamma-secretase activity is abrogated. We demonstrate that, like other dominant negative isoforms of PS1, DeltaTM1-2 expression leads to reduced intracellular calcium. However, unlike other dominant negative isoforms, DeltaTM1-2 leads to a deficit rather than a potentiation of CCE. These data suggest that changes in the structural components of presenilin can modulate CCE independent of its function in gamma-secretase activity and intracellular calcium stores.

Number:  491
UID:  15326347
Founded words:  ['regulate', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  Proteases that reside in cellular membranes apparently wield water to hydrolyze the peptide bonds of substrates despite their water-excluding environment. Although these intramembrane proteases bear little or no sequence resemblance to classical water-soluble proteases, they have ostensibly converged on similar hydrolytic mechanisms. Identification of essential amino acid residues of these proteases suggests that they use residue combinations for catalysis in the same way as their soluble cousins. In contrast to classical proteases, however, the catalytic residues of intramembrane proteases lie within predicted hydrophobic transmembrane domains. Elucidating the biological functions of intramembrane proteases, identifying their substrates, and understanding how they hydrolyze peptide bonds within membranes will shed light on the ways these proteases regulate crucial biological processes and contribute to disease.

Number:  492
UID:  15322123
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interact', 'association', 'association', 'associate', 'associate', 'associate', 'associated', 'interactions', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interact', 'mediate', 'mediate', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  The gamma-secretase complex catalyzes the cleavage of the amyloid precursor protein in its transmembrane domain resulting in the formation of the amyloid beta-peptide and the cytoplasmic APP intracellular domain. The active gamma-secretase complex is composed of at least four subunits: presenilin (PS), nicastrin, Aph-1, and Pen-2, where the presence of all components is critically required for gamma-cleavage to occur. The PS proteins are themselves subjected to endoproteolytic cleavage resulting in the generation of an N-terminal and a C-terminal fragment that remain stably associated as a heterodimer. Here we investigated the effects of modifications on the C terminus of PS1 on PS1 endoproteolysis, gamma-secretase complex assembly, and activity in cells devoid of endogenous PS. We report that certain mutations and, in particular, deletions of the PS1 C terminus decrease gamma-secretase activity, PS1 endoproteolysis, and gamma-secretase complex formation. We demonstrate that the N- and C-terminal PS1 fragments can associate with each other in mutants having C-terminal truncations that cause loss of interaction with nicastrin and Aph-1. In addition, we show that the C-terminal fragment of PS1 alone can mediate interaction with nicastrin and Aph-1 in PS null cells expressing only the C-terminal fragment of PS1. Taken together, these data suggest that the PS1 N- and C-terminal fragment intermolecular interactions are independent of an association with nicastrin and Aph-1, and that nicastrin and Aph-1 interact with the C-terminal part of PS1 in the absence of an association with full-length PS1 or the N-terminal fragment.

Number:  493
UID:  15322084
Founded words:  ['association', 'association', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulating', 'regulating']
Abstract:  Alzheimer's disease-associated beta-amyloid peptides (Abeta) are generated by the sequential proteolytic processing of amyloid precursor protein (APP) by beta- and gamma-secretases. There is growing evidence that cholesterol- and sphingolipid-rich membrane microdomains are involved in regulating trafficking and processing of APP. BACE1, the major beta-secretase in neurons is a palmitoylated transmembrane protein that resides in lipid rafts. A subset of APP is subject to amyloidogenic processing by BACE1 in lipid rafts, and this process depends on the integrity of lipid rafts. Here we describe the association of all four components of the gamma-secretase complex, namely presenilin 1 (PS1)-derived fragments, mature nicastrin, APH-1, and PEN-2, with cholesterol-rich detergent insoluble membrane (DIM) domains of non-neuronal cells and neurons that fulfill the criteria of lipid rafts. In PS1(-/-)/PS2(-/-) and NCT(-/-) fibroblasts, gamma-secretase components that still remain fail to become detergent-resistant, suggesting that raft association requires gamma-secretase complex assembly. Biochemical evidence shows that subunits of the gamma-secretase complex and three TGN/endosome-resident SNAREs cofractionate in sucrose density gradients, and show similar solubility or insolubility characteristics in distinct non-ionic and zwitterionic detergents, indicative of their co-residence in membrane microdomains with similar protein-lipid composition. This notion is confirmed using magnetic immunoisolation of PS1- or syntaxin 6-positive membrane patches from a mixture of membranes with similar buoyant densities following Lubrol WX extraction or sonication, and gradient centrifugation. These findings are consistent with the localization of gamma-secretase in lipid raft microdomains of post-Golgi and endosomes, organelles previously implicated in amyloidogenic processing of APP.

Number:  494
UID:  15319485
Founded words:  ['activator']
Abstract:  It is anticipated that gamma-secretase inhibitors (gamma-Sec-I) that modulate Notch processing will alter differentiation in tissues whose architecture is governed by Notch signaling. To explore this hypothesis, Han Wistar rats were dosed for up to 5 days with 10-100 micromol/kg b.i.d. gamma-Sec-I from three chemical series that inhibit Notch processing in vitro at various potencies (Notch IC(50)). These included an arylsulfonamide (AS) (142 nM), a dibenzazepine (DBZ) (1.7 nM), and a benzodiazepine (BZ) (2.2 nM). The DBZ and BZ caused dose-dependent intestinal goblet cell metaplasia. In contrast, the AS produced no detectable in vivo toxicity, despite higher exposure to free drug. In a time course using BZ, small intestinal crypt cell and large intestinal glandular cell epithelial apoptosis was observed on days 1-5, followed by goblet cell metaplasia on days 2-5 and crypt epithelial and glandular epithelial regenerative hyperplasia on days 4-5. Gene expression profiling of duodenal samples from BZ-dosed animals revealed significant time-dependent deregulation of mRNAs for various panendocrine, hormonal, and transcription factor genes. Somatostatin, secretin, mucin, CCK, and gastrin mRNAs were elevated twofold or more by day 2, and a number of candidate "early-predictive" genes were altered on days 1-2, remaining changed for 4-5 days; these included Delta1, NeuroD, Hes1-regulated adipsin, and the Hes-regulated transcriptional activator of gut secretory lineage differentiation, the rat homolog of Drosophila atonal, Rath1. Western blotting of fecal protein from BZ-and DBZ-dosed animals exhibited increased levels of both anti-Rath1 reactive protein and anti-adipsin reactive proteins, confirming their potential value as noninvasive biomarkers of intestinal goblet metaplasia.

Number:  495
UID:  15308312
Founded words:  ['function', 'function']
Abstract:  Amyloid beta-protein (A beta) is a pivotal pathological factor in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Tenuigenin, extracted from the Chinese herb Polygala tenuifolia, seems to ameliorate the reduction in cholinergic function on rat models induced by A beta. To examine this therapeutic effect, we tested whether Tenuigenin could inhibit secretion of A beta in neuroblastoma cells stably transfected with two amyloid precursor protein (APP) constructs: the APP695 cDNA (SH-SY5Y APP695) and the C-terminal 99 amino acid residues of APP plus the signal peptide (SH-SY5Y SPA4CT). Tenuigenin inhibited the secretion of A beta and the C-terminal 99 amino acids of APP (C99) in SH-SY5Y APP695 cells, but did not change the A beta and C99 levels in SH-SY5Y SPA4CT cells. Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET) assays showed that Tenuigenin inhibited the proteolytic activities of BACE1 (beta-secretase) on its substrate in vitro. In addition, Tenuigenin did not demonstrate any cytotoxic effects, nor did it affect APP mRNA expression, holoAPP synthesis or sAPP alpha secretion. Our data suggest that Tenuigenin can inhibit the secretion of A beta in SH-SY5Y APP 695 cells via BACE1 inhibition. Taken together, these results suggest that Tenuigenin may be worthy of future study as an anti-AD drug.

Number:  496
UID:  15304096
Founded words:  ['regulating', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulating', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  The soluble form of the beta-amyloid precursor protein (sAPPalpha) is known to function in the autocrine regulation of epidermal growth and repair. Here we show that its proteolytic release by alpha-secretase in normal human keratinocytes is susceptible to hydroxamic-acid-based zinc metalloproteinase inhibitors and suppressed by these inhibitors by 80%-90%. As various other growth factors participate in regulating epidermal growth we investigated whether the inhibitor-induced sAPPalpha-deficiency would affect keratinocyte proliferation. At optimal inhibitor concentrations the suppression of sAPPalpha-release was followed by a decline in proliferation by 50%-60%, indicating that sAPPalpha is a major growth factor that cannot be compensated for by other growth factors. This finding was the basis for the treatment of human lesional psoriatic keratinocytes with these inhibitors, which resulted in the normalization of their increased proliferation rates. The reversibility of these effects and the lack of toxicity underline the value of these inhibitors and suggest their therapeutic application in psoriatic skin diseases.

Number:  497
UID:  15289451
Founded words:  ['mediated', 'regulated']
Abstract:  The amyloid beta protein (Abeta) is derived from beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP). Cleavage of APP by beta-secretase generates a C-terminal fragment (APPCTFbeta or C99), which is subsequently cleaved by gamma-secretase to produce Abeta. BACE (or BACE1), the major beta-secretase involved in cleaving APP, has been identified as a Type 1 membrane-associated aspartyl protease. In this study, we found that treatment with proteasome inhibitors resulted in an increase in APP C99 levels, suggesting that APP processing at the beta-secretase site may be affected by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. To investigate whether the degradation of BACE is mediated by the proteasome pathway, cells stably transfected with BACE were treated with lactacystin. We found that BACE protein degradation was inhibited by lactacystin in a time- and dose-dependent manner. Non-proteasome protease inhibitors had no effect on BACE degradation. BACE protein is ubiquitinated. Furthermore, lactacystin increased APP C99 production and Abeta generation. Our data demonstrate that the degradation of BACE proteins and APP processing are regulated by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway.

Number:  498
UID:  15287727
Founded words:  ['associated', 'mediated']
Abstract:  Beta-amyloid (Abeta), a peptide generated by proteolytic cleavage of the amyloid precursor protein (APP), is a major constituent of the neuritic plaques associated with Alzheimer's disease (AD). Up-regulation of alpha-secretase, which can hydrolyze Abeta between Lys16 and Leu17, has been proposed as a potential therapeutic strategy in the treatment of AD. Previously, we identified two light-chain antibody fragments that had proteolytic activity against Abeta, one with alpha-secretase-like activity and one with carboxypeptidase-like activity. Here we show that cleavage of Abeta40 by hk14, the light-chain antibody having carboxypeptidase-like activity, alters aggregation of Abeta and neutralizes any cytotoxic effects of the peptide. Cleavage of Abeta40 with c23.5, the light chain having alpha-secretase-like cleavage, substantially increases the aggregation rate of Abeta; however, it does not show any corresponding increase in cytotoxicity. The increase in aggregation resulting from hydrolysis by c23.5 can be attributed to the decreased solubility of the hydrolyzed products relative to the parent Abeta40, primarily the Abeta17-40 fragment. These results demonstrate that antibody fragment mediated proteolytic degradation of Abeta peptide can be a potential therapeutic route to control Abeta aggregation and toxicity in vivo. Our results also suggest that increasing alpha-secretase activity as a therapeutic route must be approached with some caution because this can lead to a substantial increase in aggregation.

Number:  499
UID:  15286784
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  Inhibiting the activity of the beta-amyloid converting enzyme 1 (BACE1) or reducing levels of BACE1 in vivo decreases the production of amyloid-beta. The reticulon family of proteins has four members, RTN1, RTN2, RTN3 and RTN4 (also known as Nogo), the last of which is well known for its role in inhibiting neuritic outgrowth after injury. Here we show that reticulon family members are binding partners of BACE1. In brain, BACE1 mainly colocalizes with RTN3 in neurons, whereas RTN4 is more enriched in oligodendrocytes. An increase in the expression of any reticulon protein substantially reduces the production of Abeta. Conversely, lowering the expression of RTN3 by RNA interference increases the secretion of Abeta, suggesting that reticulon proteins are negative modulators of BACE1 in cells. Our data support a mechanism by which reticulon proteins block access of BACE1 to amyloid precursor protein and reduce the cleavage of this protein. Thus, changes in the expression of reticulon proteins in the human brain are likely to affect cellular amyloid-beta and the formation of amyloid plaques.

Number:  500
UID:  15286082
Founded words:  ['associated', 'complex', 'complex', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complex', 'complex', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  The gamma-secretase complex catalyzes the final intramembraneous cleavage of the beta-amyloid precursor protein, liberating the neurotoxic amyloid beta-peptide implicated in Alzheimer's disease. Apart from the catalytic subunit presenilin (PS), three additional subunits, nicastrin, APH-1, and PEN-2, have been identified. In mammals, two PS homologues, PS1 and PS2, which are part of distinct gamma-secretase complexes, exist. Likewise, two APH-1 homologues, APH-1a and APH-1b, have been identified. Furthermore, two APH-1a splice forms, APH-1aS and APH-1aL, have been reported. Here we show that both APH-1a splice forms and APH-1b are expressed in peripheral and neuronal cells. APH-1aS, APH-1aL, and APH-1b form separate, proteolytically active gamma-secretase complexes containing either one of the two PSs. Deficiency of APH-1a caused a decrease in nicastrin, PS, and PEN-2 levels and an increase in the levels of APH-1b, whereas deficiency of APH-1b did not affect the levels of APH-1a or the other complex components. Consistent with this finding, we found that deficiency of APH-1a was associated with reduced gamma-secretase activity, whereas deficiency of APH-1b was not. Thus, APH-1b gamma-secretase complexes may fulfill redundant functions. Taken together, our results suggest that, dependent on the tissue expression of the individual subunits, six distinct gamma-secretase complexes composed of the known subunits can exist in human cells.

Number:  501
UID:  15274632
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex', 'regulatory', 'regulate']
Abstract:  Gamma-secretase is a member of an unusual class of proteases with intramembrane catalytic sites. This enzyme cleaves many type I membrane proteins, including the amyloid beta-protein (Abeta) precursor (APP) and the Notch receptor. Biochemical and genetic studies have identified four membrane proteins as components of gamma-secretase: heterodimeric presenilin (PS) composed of its N- and C-terminal fragments (PS-NTF/CTF), a mature glycosylated form of nicastrin (NCT), Aph-1, and Pen-2. Recent data from studies in Drosophila, mammalian, and yeast cells suggest that PS, NCT, Aph-1, and Pen-2 are necessary and sufficient to reconstitute gamma-secretase activity. However, many unresolved issues, in particular the possibility of other structural or regulatory components, would be resolved by actually purifying the enzyme. Here, we report a detailed, multistep purification procedure for active gamma-secretase and an initial characterization of the purified protease. Extensive mass spectrometry of the purified proteins strongly suggests that PS-NTF/CTF, mNCT, Aph-1, and Pen-2 are the components of active gamma-secretase. Using the purified gamma-secretase, we describe factors that modulate the production of specific Abeta species: (1) phosphatidylcholine and sphingomyelin dramatically improve activity without changing cleavage specificity within an APP substrate; (2) increasing CHAPSO concentrations from 0.1 to 0.25% yields a approximately 100% increase in Abeta42 production; (3) exposure of an APP-based recombinant substrate to 0.5% SDS modulates cleavage specificity from a disease-mimicking pattern (high Abeta42/43) to a physiological pattern (high Abeta40); and (4) sulindac sulfide directly and preferentially decreases Abeta42 cleavage within the purified complex. Taken together, our results define a procedure for purifying active gamma-secretase and suggest that the lipid-mediated conformation of both enzyme and substrate regulate the production of the potentially neurotoxic Abeta42 and Abeta43 peptides.

Number:  502
UID:  15248287
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulated', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  The gamma-secretase complex has emerged as an unusual membrane-bound aspartyl protease with the ability to cleave certain substrate proteins at peptide bonds believed to be buried within the hydrophobic environment of the lipid bilayer. This cleavage is responsible for a key biochemical step in signaling from several different cell-surface receptors, and it is also crucial in generating the neurotoxic amyloid peptides that are central to the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease. Active gamma-secretase is a multimeric protein complex consisting of at least four different proteins, presenilin, nicastrin, Aph-1, and Pen-2, with presenilin serving as the catalytically active core of the aspartyl protease. Presenilin itself undergoes endoproteolytic maturation, a process that is tightly regulated during the assembly and maturation of gamma-secretase, and that depends on the three cofactors nicastrin, Aph-1, and Pen-2. Recent studies have demonstrated that presenilin and its three cofactors are likely to be the major proteins needed for functional reconstitution of active gamma-secretase and have begun to elucidate the specific functions of the cofactors in the ordered assembly of gamma-secretase.

Number:  503
UID:  15247262
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'associate', 'associate', 'associate', 'interactions', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Beta-site APP-cleaving enzyme (BACE) is a membrane-bound aspartyl protease with no strict primary preference for cleavage. The molecular mechanisms that link the gamma-secretase multicomponent amyloid precursor protein (APP) processing complex to biochemical properties of BACE generating the N terminus of the amyloid beta-peptide have not, as yet, been identified. We found that in human brain tissue, BACE occurred as a dimer. The overall stability of the BACE homodimer was based on intermolecular interactions that were not affected by high salt, nonionic detergents or reducing conditions. BACE homodimers could only partially be separated even under strong denaturing conditions and revealed dramatic differences in the surface charge distribution compared with the monomer. In contrast, the soluble ectodomain of truncated BACE revealed a seemingly lower avidity to the prototypic aspartate protease inhibitor pepstatin and exclusively occurred in the monomeric form. Immunocytochemical studies colocalized APP and BACE in the plasma membrane of cells expressing endogenous levels of BACE and overexpressing APP. In cells that were cotransfected with APP and a putative active site D289A mutant of BACE, colocalization persisted. Remaining enzyme activity was found to be attributable to the mutant protease. Accordingly, inactivation of the carboxyl-terminal active site motif of BACE without an impairment of overall enzyme activity suggests that the enzyme may act as a dimer. Thus, homodimerization of BACE may help the enzyme to acquire specific mechanisms to associate with its substrates to exert catalytic activity.

Number:  504
UID:  15240571
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activation', 'interacts', 'interacts']
Abstract:  Activation of mammalian Notch receptor by its ligands induces TNFalpha-converting enzyme-dependent ectodomain shedding, followed by intramembrane proteolysis due to presenilin (PS)-dependent gamma-secretase activity. Here, we demonstrate that a new modification, a monoubiquitination, as well as clathrin-dependent endocytosis, is required for gamma-secretase processing of a constitutively active Notch derivative, DeltaE, which mimics the TNFalpha-converting enzyme-processing product. PS interacts with this modified form of DeltaE, DeltaEu. We identified the lysine residue targeted by the monoubiquitination event and confirmed its importance for activation of Notch receptor by its ligand, Delta-like 1. We propose a new model where monoubiquitination and endocytosis of Notch are a prerequisite for its PS-dependent cleavage, and discuss its relevance for other gamma-secretase substrates.

Number:  505
UID:  15234966
Founded words:  ['functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  Membrane-bound BACE1 naturally cleaves its transmembrane substrate amyloid precursor protein (APP) at the two adjacent beta- and beta'-sites. Cleavage at these two sites generates the heterogeneous N-terminal end of APP C-terminal fragments that are further processed by gamma-secretase to release Abeta-(1-40/42) or Abeta-(11-40/42). The significance underlying Abeta-(11-40/42) in Alzheimer's disease pathogenesis has remained to be experimentally elucidated, but increased production of Abeta-(1-40/42) has been broadly demonstrated to contribute to amyloid depositions in senile plaques. In this study, we show that the cleavage of APP at the beta-site by BACE1 is readily disrupted through limited structural twists, whereas the beta'-site is relatively better positioned to gain access to the BACE1 catalytic cavity. Radical insertion or deletion of residues between beta- and beta'-site also favors cleavage of APP at the beta'-site. On the other hand, either lengthening or shortening the loop region of BACE1 has a minor impact on the selective cleavage of APP at these two adjacent sites, but significantly shortening the loop region impairs the ability of BACE1 to process APP at both sites. Thus, processing of APP by BACE1 is clearly dependent on a mutual structural compatibility in addition to the sequence feature. The knowledge gained from this study will potentially offer an opportunity for rational design of small molecule drugs to block the cleavage of APP specifically at the beta-site while not disturbing the functions of other cellular aspartyl proteases.

Number:  506
UID:  15220354
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interactions', 'mediate', 'mediate', 'mediates']
Abstract:  Presenilins are the catalytic components of gamma-secretase, an intramembrane-cleaving protease whose substrates include beta-amyloid precursor protein (betaAPP) and the Notch receptors. These type I transmembrane proteins undergo two distinct presenilin-dependent cleavages within the transmembrane region, which result in the production of Abeta and APP intracellular domain (from betaAPP) and the Notch intracellular domain signaling peptide. Most cases of familial Alzheimer's disease are caused by presenilin mutations, which are scattered throughout the coding sequence. Although the underlying molecular mechanism is not yet known, the familial Alzheimer's disease mutations produce a shift in the ratio of the long and short forms of the Abeta peptide generated by the gamma-secretase. We and others have previously shown that presenilin homodimerizes and suggested that a presenilin dimer is at the catalytic core of gamma-secretase. Here, we demonstrate that presenilin transmembrane domains contribute to the formation of the dimer. In-frame substitution of the hydrophilic loop 1, located between transmembranes I and II, which modulates the interactions within the N-terminal fragment/N-terminal fragment dimer, abolishes both presenilinase and gamma-secretase activities. In addition, by reconstituting gamma-secretase activity from two catalytically inactive presenilin aspartic mutants, we provide evidence of an active diaspartyl group assembled at the interface between two presenilin monomers. Under our conditions, this catalytic group mediates the generation of APP intracellular domain and Abeta but not Notch intracellular domain, therefore suggesting that specific diaspartyl groups within the presenilin catalytic core of gamma-secretase mediate the cleavage of different substrates.

Number:  507
UID:  15215246
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  This study shows that the high affinity alpha-chain of the interleukin (IL)-15 receptor exists not only in membrane-anchored but also in soluble form. Soluble IL-15Ralpha (sIL-15Ralpha) can be detected in mouse sera and cell-conditioned media by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and by immunoprecipitation and Western blotting. This protein has a molecular mass of about 30 kDa because of the presence of a single N-glycosylation site, which is reduced to 26 kDa after N-glycosidase treatment. Transmembrane IL-15Ralpha is constitutively converted into its soluble form by proteolytic cleavage that involves tumor necrosis factor-alpha-converting enzyme (TACE), and this process is further enhanced by phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) stimulation. The hydroxamate GW280264X, which is capable of blocking TACE and the closely related disintegrin-like metalloproteinase 10 (ADAM10), effectively inhibited both spontaneous and PMA-inducible cleavage of IL-15Ralpha, whereas GI254023X, which preferentially blocks ADAM10, was ineffective. Overexpression of TACE but not ADAM10 in COS-7 cells enhanced the constitutive and PMA-inducible cleavage of IL-15Ralpha. Moreover, murine fibroblasts deficient in TACE but not ADAM10 expression exhibited a significant reduction in the spontaneous and inducible IL-15Ralpha shedding, whereas a reconstitution of TACE in these cells restored the release of sIL-15Ralpha, thereby suggesting that TACE-mediated proteolysis may represent a major mechanism for sIL-15Ralpha generation in mice. The existence of natural sIL-15Ralpha offers novel insights into the complex biology of IL-15 and envisages a new level for therapeutic intervention.

Number:  508
UID:  15215237
Founded words:  ['associated', 'binding', 'binding', 'complex', 'complex', 'complexes', 'complex', 'complex', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  In vitro reconstitution of functions of membrane proteins is often hampered by aggregation, misfolding, or lack of post-translational modifications of the proteins attributable to overexpression. To overcome this technical obstacle, we have developed a method to express multimeric integral membrane proteins in extracellular (budded) baculovirus particles that are released from Sf9 cells co-infected with multiple transmembrane proteins. We applied this method to the reconstitution of gamma-secretase, a membrane protease complex that catalyzes the intramembrane cleavage of beta-amyloid precursor protein to release Abeta peptides, the major component of amyloid deposits in Alzheimer brains as well as of Notch. When we co-infected Sf9 cells with human presenilin 1 (PS1), nicastrin, APH-1a, and PEN-2, a high-molecular-weight membrane protein complex that contained PS1 exclusively in its fragment form associated with three other cofactor proteins was reconstituted and recovered in a highly gamma-secretase-active state in budded virus particles, whereas nonfunctional PS1 holoproteins massively contaminated the parental Sf9 cell membranes. The relative gamma-secretase activity (per molar PS1 fragments) was concentrated by approximately 2.5 fold in budded virus particles compared with that in Sf9 membranes. The budded baculovirus system will facilitate structural and functional analyses of gamma-secretase, as well as screening of its binding molecules or inhibitors, and will also provide a versatile methodology for the characterization of a variety of membrane protein complexes.

Number:  509
UID:  15197182
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interaction', 'interacts', 'interactions', 'interaction', 'interacts', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  Memapsin 2 (beta-secretase) is the protease that initiates cleavage of amyloid precursor protein (APP) leading to the production of amyloid-beta (Abeta) peptide and the onset of Alzheimer's disease. Both APP and memapsin 2 are Type I transmembrane proteins and are endocytosed into endosomes where APP is cleaved by memapsin 2. Separate endocytic signals are located in the cytosolic domains of these proteins. We demonstrate here that the addition of the ectodomain of memapsin 2 (M2(ED)) to cells transfected with native APP or APP Swedish mutant (APPsw) resulted in the internalization of M2(ED) into endosomes with increased Abeta production. These effects were reduced by treatment with glycosylphosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C. The nontransfected parental cells had little internalization of M2(ED). The internalization of M2(ED) was dependent on the endocytosis signal in APP, because the expression of a mutant APP that lacks its endocytosis signal failed to support M2(ED) internalization. These results suggest that exogenously added M2(ED) interacts with the ectodomain of APP on the cell surface leading to the internalization of M2(ED), supported by fluorescence resonance energy transfer experiments. The interactions between the two proteins is not due to the binding of substrate APPsw to the active site of memapsin 2, because neither a potent active site binding inhibitor of memapsin 2 nor an antibody directed to the beta-secretase site of APPsw had an effect on the uptake of M2(ED). In addition, full-length memapsin 2 and APP, immunoprecipitated together from cell lysates, suggested that the interaction of these two proteins is part of the native cellular processes.

Number:  510
UID:  15184387
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activation', 'activation', 'activation', 'activation', 'activation', 'activation', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Familial Alzheimer's disease mutations in the presenilin 1 gene (PSEN1) have been previously shown to potentiate caspase activation and apoptosis in transfected cells and transgenic mice. However, the mechanism underlying this effect is not known. We set out to determine whether cellular sensitivity to caspase activation could be affected by modulating presenilin 1 (PS1) processing. PS1 processing was altered using RNA interference (RNAi) aimed at silencing the expression of the genes encoding the four components of the gamma-secretase complex, PSEN1, APH-1, PEN-2, and nicastrin. RNAi for these genes was carried out in naive H4 human neuroglioma cells, as well as H4 cell lines overexpressing either wild-type PSEN1 or the Familial Alzheimer's disease mutant PSEN1-Delta9 (PS1-mutant), that were induced to undergo apoptosis. In wild-type PSEN1 cells, RNAi for PEN-2, as expected, increased levels of full-length PS1 (PS1-FL) and decreased PS1 endoproteolysis. This was accompanied by potentiated caspase-3 activation in response to an apoptotic stimulus. In contrast, nicastrin RNAi, which only decreased levels of PS1-amino-terminal fragment and did not affect PS1-FL levels, had no effect on caspase-3 activation during apoptosis. Surprisingly, in the PS1-mutant cells, RNAi for PEN-2 (and APH-1) did not increase but instead reduced the levels of PS1-FL deleted for exon 9. In turn, this was accompanied by attenuated caspase-3 activation in response to an apoptotic stimulus. Finally, in naive H4 cells, PSEN1 RNAi also attenuated caspase-3 activation in response to an apoptotic stimulus. Collectively, these findings indicate that cellular sensitivity to caspase activation correlates with overall PS1 protein levels, particularly with levels of FL-PS1.

Number:  511
UID:  15182369
Founded words:  ['activates', 'regulating', 'regulating']
Abstract:  Numerous transmembrane proteins, including the blood pressure regulating angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) and the Alzheimer's disease amyloid precursor protein (APP), are proteolytically shed from the plasma membrane by metalloproteases. We have used an antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) approach to delineate the role of ADAM10 and tumour necrosis factor-alpha converting enzyme (TACE; ADAM17) in the ectodomain shedding of ACE and APP from human SH-SY5Y cells. Although the ADAM10 ASO and TACE ASO significantly reduced (> 81%) their respective mRNA levels and reduced the alpha-secretase shedding of APP by 60% and 30%, respectively, neither ASO reduced the shedding of ACE. The mercurial compound 4-aminophenylmercuric acetate (APMA) stimulated the shedding of ACE but not of APP. The APMA-stimulated secretase cleaved ACE at the same Arg-Ser bond in the juxtamembrane stalk as the constitutive secretase but was more sensitive to inhibition by a hydroxamate-based compound. The APMA-activated shedding of ACE was not reduced by the ADAM10 or TACE ASOs. These results indicate that neither ADAM10 nor TACE are involved in the shedding of ACE and that APMA, which activates a distinct ACE secretase, is the first pharmacological agent to distinguish between the shedding of ACE and APP.

Number:  512
UID:  15177452
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction']
Abstract:  A new series of bis-statine based peptidomimetic inhibitors of human beta-secretase (BACE 1) was developed by structure-based modification of the three regions to the initial lead 3: an N-terminus, a central bis-statine core, and a C-terminus. Introduction of a 4-aminomethylbenzoic acid on the C-terminus resulted in a potent BACE 1 inhibitor with an IC50 value of 21 nM. The general requirements for the optimal substrate-enzyme interaction are disclosed herein.

Number:  513
UID:  15147304
Founded words:  ['associated', 'binding', 'binding', 'mediated']
Abstract:  Ten days treatment with nicotine reduced insoluble amyloid A beta 1-40 and Alpha beta 1-42 peptides by 80% in the cortex of 9-month-old APPsw mice, which is more than that observed in 14.5-month-old mice following nicotine treatment for 5.5 months. A reduction in A beta associated with cerebral vessels was observed in addition to that deposited as parenchymal plaques after 5.5 months treatment. The diminution in A beta peptides observed was not accompanied by changes in brain alpha, beta or gamma secretase-like activities, NGF or BDNF protein expression measured in brain homogenates. A significant increase in sAPP was observed after nicotine treatment of SH-SY5Yneuroblastoma cells that could be blocked by the nicotinic antagonist mecamylamine. Attenuation of elevated [(125)I]-alpha bungarotoxin binding (alpha 7) in APPsw mice was observed after 5.5 months nicotine treatment. Both these observations suggest that the reduction in insoluble A beta by nicotine might be in part mediated via the alpha 7 nicotinic receptor. Further studies are required to identify potential mechanisms of the nicotine's amyloid-reducing effect.

Number:  514
UID:  15123735
Founded words:  ['associated', 'associated']
Abstract:  Presenilin-1 null mutation (PS1 -/-) in mice is associated with morphological alterations and defects in cleavage of transmembrane proteins. Here, we demonstrate that PS1 deficiency also leads to the formation of degradative vacuoles and to the aberrant translocation of presynaptic alpha- and beta-synuclein proteins to these organelles in the perikarya of primary neurons, concomitant with significant increases in the levels of both synucleins. Stimulation of autophagy in control neurons produced a similar mislocalization of synucleins as genetic ablation of PS1. These effects were not the result of the loss of PS1 gamma-secretase activity; however, dysregulation of calcium channels in PS1 -/- cells may be involved. Finally, colocalization of alpha-synuclein and degradative organelles was observed in brains from patients with the Lewy body variant of AD. Thus, aberrant accumulation of alpha- and beta-synuclein in degradative organelles are novel features of PS1 -/- neurons, and similar events may promote the formation of alpha-synuclein inclusions associated with neurodegenerative diseases.

Number:  515
UID:  15123653
Founded words:  ['activation', 'regulating', 'regulating']
Abstract:  During normal development Notch receptor signaling is important in regulating numerous cell fate decisions. Mutations that truncate the extracellular domain of Notch receptors can cause aberrant signaling and promote unregulated cell growth. We have examined two types of truncated Notch oncoproteins that arise from proviral insertion into the Notch4 gene (Notch4/int-3) or a chromosomal translocation involving the Notch1 gene (TAN-1). Both Notch4/int-3 and TAN-1 oncoproteins lack most or all of their ectodomain. Normal Notch signaling requires gamma-secretase/presenilin-mediated proteolytic processing, but whether Notch oncoproteins are also dependent on gamma-secretase/presenilin activity is not known. We demonstrate that Notch4/int-3-induced activation of the downstream transcription factor, CSL, is abrogated in cells deficient in presenilins or treated with a pharmacological inhibitor of gamma-secretase/presenilins. Furthermore, we find that both Notch4/int-3 and TAN-1 accumulate at the cell surface, where presenilin-dependent cleavage occurs, when gamma-secretase/presenilin activity is inhibited. gamma-Secretase/presenilin inhibition effectively blocks cellular responses to Notch4/int-3, but not TAN-1, apparently because some TAN-1 polypeptides lack transmembrane domains and do not require gamma-secretase/presenilin activity for nuclear access. These studies highlight potential uses and limitations of gamma-secretase/presenilin inhibitors in targeted therapy of Notch-related neoplasms.

Number:  516
UID:  15123598
Founded words:  ['associated', 'complex', 'complex', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulated', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Several lines of evidence have indicated that the presenilin proteins function within macromolecular complexes and are necessary for the regulated intramembranous proteolysis of certain type 1 transmembrane proteins, including the amyloid precursor protein, Notch, and p75. Data from multiple complementary experiments now suggest that there may be several distinct presenilin complexes. We show here that presenilin mutations and certain detergents affect the abundance and componentry of the presenilin complexes, and these structural effects correlate with their effects on gamma-secretase activity. Our data suggest that there are at least three complexes, including a approximately 150-kDa nicastrin-aph-1 complex (which is likely to be a precursor complex). There is a stable and abundant intermediate complex of approximately 440 kDa, which contains aph-1, pen-2, nicastrin, and PS1. However, it is the very low abundance, high mass (>/=670 kDa) heteromeric complexes that are associated with the highest gamma-secretase-specific activity.

Number:  517
UID:  15123597
Founded words:  ['activated', 'binding', 'binding', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulate']
Abstract:  The amyloid precursor protein (APP) gives rise toc beta-amyloid peptides, which are the main constituents of senile plaques in brains of Alzheimer's disease patients. Non-amyloidogenic processing of the APP can be stimulated by phorbol esters (PEs) and by intracellular diacylglycerol (DAG) generation. This led to the hypothesis that classical and novel protein kinase Cs (PKCs), which are activated by DAG/PEs, regulate APP processing. However, in addition to PKCs, there are other DAG/PE receptors present in neurons that may participate in the modulation of APP processing. Munc13-1, a presynaptic protein with an essential role in synaptic vesicle priming, represents such an alternative target of the DAG second messenger pathway. Using Munc13-1 knock-out mice and knock-in mice expressing a Munc13-1(H567K) variant deficient in DAG/PE binding, we determined the relative contributions of PKCs and Munc13-1 to PE-stimulated secretory APP processing. We establish that, in addition to PKC, Munc13-1 significantly contributes to the regulation of secretory APP metabolism.

Number:  518
UID:  15117318
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'complex', 'complex', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  BACE (beta-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme, beta-secretase) is a type-I membrane protein which functions as an aspartic protease in the production of beta-amyloid peptide, a causative agent of Alzheimer's disease. Its cytoplasmic tail has a characteristic acidic-cluster dileucine motif recognized by the VHS domain of adaptor proteins, GGAs (Golgi-localizing, gamma-adaptin ear homology domain, ARF-interacting). Here we show that BACE is colocalized with GGAs in the trans-Golgi network and peripheral structures, and phosphorylation of a serine residue in the cytoplasmic tail enhances interaction with the VHS domain of GGA1 by about threefold. The X-ray crystal structure of the complex between the GGA1-VHS domain and the BACE C-terminal peptide illustrates a similar recognition mechanism as mannose 6-phosphate receptors except that a glutamine residue closes in to fill the gap created by the shorter BACE peptide. The serine and lysine of the BACE peptide point their side chains towards the solvent. However, phosphorylation of the serine affects the lysine side chain and the peptide backbone, resulting in one additional hydrogen bond and a stronger electrostatic interaction with the VHS domain, hence the reversible increase in affinity.

Number:  519
UID:  15096037
Founded words:  ['function', 'function']
Abstract:  The three-dimensional structure of unbound human memapsin 2 (beta-secretase) protease domain determined at 2.0-A resolution has revealed a new position of the flap region, which appears to be locked in an "open" position. While the structure outside of the flap is essentially the same as the structure of memapsin 2 bound to an inhibitor, the flap positions are 4.5 A different at the tips. The open position of the flap in the current structure is stabilized by two newly formed intraflap hydrogen bonds and anchored by a new hydrogen bond involving the side chain of Tyr 71 (Tyr 75 in pepsin numbering) in a novel orientation. In molecular modeling experiments, the opening of the flap, 6.5 A at the narrowest point, permits entrance of substrates into the cleft. The narrowest point of the opening may function to discriminate among substrates based on sequence and shape. The observed flap opening may also serve as a model for the flap movement in the catalytic mechanism of eukaryotic aspartic proteases and provide insight for the side-chain selection in the design of memapsin 2 inhibitors.

Number:  520
UID:  15087467
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binds', 'binding', 'regulated']
Abstract:  The cleavage of the transmembrane amyloid precursor protein (APP) by beta-secretase leaves the C-terminal fragment of APP, C99, anchored in the plasma membrane. C99 is subsequently processed by gamma-secretase, an unusual aspartyl protease activity largely dependent on presenilin (PS), generating the amyloid beta-peptide (Abeta) that accumulates in the brain of patients with Alzheimer's disease. It has been suggested that PS proteins are the catalytic core of this proteolytic activity, but a number of other proteins mandatory for gamma-secretase cleavage have also been discovered. The exact role of PS in the gamma-secretase activity remains a matter of debate, because cells devoid of PS still produce some forms of Abeta. Here, we used insect cells expressing C99 to demonstrate that the expression of presenilin 1 (PS1), which binds C99, not only increases the production of Abeta by these cells but also increases the intracellular levels of C99 to the same extent. Using pulse-chase experiments, we established that this results from an increased half-life of C99 in cells expressing PS1. In Chinese hamster ovary cells producing C99 from full-length human APP, similar results were observed. Finally, we show that a functional inhibitor of gamma-secretase does not alter the ability of PS1 to increase the intracellular levels of C99. This finding suggests that the binding of PS1 to C99 does not necessarily lead to its immediate cleavage by gamma-secretase, which could be a spatio-temporally regulated or an induced event, and provides biochemical evidence for the existence of a substrate-docking site on PS1.

Number:  521
UID:  15056474
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Generation of A beta from the beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP) requires a series of proteolytic processes, including an intramembranous cleavage catalyzed by an aspartyl protease, gamma-secretase. Two aspartates in presenilins (PS) are required for gamma-secretase activity (D257 and D385 of PS1), suggesting that PS may be part of this protease. Little is known concerning the importance of other sequences in PS for activity. We introduced point mutations (P433L, A434D, L435R) into a completely conserved region C-terminal to transmembrane domain eight of PS1. The P433L mutation abolished PS1 endoproteolysis as well as gamma-secretase cleavage of APP and Notch in PS1/2 K/O cells. In HEK cells, expression of PS1/P433L reduced A beta production and caused accumulation of APP C-terminal stubs. When the P433L mutation was introduced into the non-cleavable Delta exon 9 (Delta E9) variant of PS1, it abolished gamma-secretase cleavage of APP and Notch. The P433L holoprotein is stable and incorporated into the high molecular weight gamma-secretase complex, arguing that P433 is not necessary for formation or stabilization of the gamma-secretase complex. Other non-conservative mutations in the invariant P(433)A(434)L(435) sequence also result in a phenotype that is indistinguishable from the aspartate mutants, suggesting a direct involvement of this sequence in gamma-secretase activity.

Number:  522
UID:  15052275
Founded words:  ['regulatory']
Abstract:  Plaques containing amyloid beta-peptides (Abeta) are a major feature in Alzheimer's disease (AD), and GM1 ganglioside is an important component of cellular plasma membranes and especially enriched in lipid raft. GM1-bound Abeta (GM1/Abeta), found in brains exhibiting early pathological changes of AD including diffuse plaques, has been suggested to be involved in the initiation of amyloid fibril formation in vivo by acting as a seed. However, the role of GM1 in amyloid beta-protein precursor (APP) processing is not yet defined. In this study, we report that exogenous GM1 ganglioside promotes Abeta biogenesis and decreases sAPPalpha secretion in SH-SY5Y and COS7 cells stably transfected with human APP695 cDNA without affecting full-length APP and the sAPPbeta levels. We also observe that GM1 increases extracellular levels of Abeta in primary cultures of mixed rat cortical neurons transiently transfected with human APP695 cDNA. These findings suggest a regulatory role for GM1 in APP processing pathways.

Number:  523
UID:  15039426
Founded words:  ['associated', 'associated', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Gamma-secretase is a protease complex composed of presenilin (PS), nicastrin (NCT), APH-1, and PEN-2, which catalyzes intramembrane cleavage of several type I transmembrane proteins including the Alzheimer's disease-associated beta-amyloid precursor protein. We generated stable RNA interference-mediated PEN-2 knockdown cells to probe mutant PEN-2 variants for functional activity. Knockdown of PEN-2 was associated with impaired NCT maturation and deficient PS1 endoproteolysis, which was efficiently rescued by wild type or N-terminally tagged PEN-2 but not by C-terminally tagged PEN-2 or by the C-terminally truncated PEN-2-DeltaC mutant. Although the latter mutants rescued the PS1 holoprotein accumulation associated with the PEN-2 knockdown, they failed to restore normal levels of the PS1 N- and C-terminal fragments and to maturate NCT. PEN-2-DeltaC was highly unstable and rapidly turned over by proteasomal degradation consistent with its failure to become stably incorporated into the gamma-secretase complex. In addition, expression of PEN-2-DeltaC caused a selective instability of the PS1 N-/C-terminal fragment heterodimer that underwent proteasomal degradation, whereas NCT and APH-1 were stable. Interestingly, when we knocked down PEN-2 in the background of the endoproteolysis-deficient PS1 Deltaexon9 mutant, immature NCT still accumulated, demonstrating that PEN-2 is also required for gamma-secretase complex maturation when PS endoproteolysis cannot occur. Taken together, our data suggest that PEN-2 is required for the stabilization of the PS fragment heterodimer within the gamma-secretase complex following PS endoproteolysis. This function critically depends on the PEN-2 C terminus. Moreover, our data show that PEN-2 is generally required for gamma-secretase complex maturation independent of its activity in PS1 endoproteolysis.

Number:  524
UID:  15037614
Founded words:  ['associate', 'associate', 'associate', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulation', 'regulation']
Abstract:  The Alcadeins (Alcs)/calsyntenins and the amyloid beta-protein precursor (APP) associate with each other in the brain by binding via their cytoplasmic domains to X11L (the X11-like protein). We previously reported that the formation of this APP-X11L-Alc tripartite complex suppresses the metabolic cleavages of APP. We show here that the metabolism of the Alcs markedly resembles that of APP. The Alcs are subjected to a primary cleavage event that releases their extracellular domain. Alcs then undergo a secondary presenilin-dependent gamma-cleavage that leads to the secretion of the amyloid beta-protein-like peptide and the liberation of an intracellular domain fragment (AlcICD). However, when Alc is in the tripartite complex, it escapes from these cleavages, as does APP. We also found that AlcICD suppressed the FE65-dependent gene transactivation activity of the APP intracellular domain fragment, probably because AlcICD competes with the APP intracellular domain fragment for binding to FE65. We propose that the Alcs and APP are coordinately metabolized in neurons and that their cleaved cytoplasmic fragments are reciprocally involved in the regulation of FE65-dependent gene transactivation. Any imbalance in the metabolism of Alcs and APP may influence the FE65-dependent gene transactivation, which together with increased secretion of amyloid beta-protein may contribute to neural disorders.

Number:  525
UID:  15034149
Founded words:  ['activated', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulation']
Abstract:  As the main beta-secretase of the central nervous system, BACE-1 is a key protein in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease. Excessive expression of the protein might cause an overproduction of the neurotoxic beta-amyloid peptide. Therefore, a tight regulation of BACE-1 expression is expected in vivo. In addition to a possible transcriptional control, the BACE-1 transcript leader contains features that might constitute mechanisms of translational regulation of protein expression. Moreover, recent work has revealed an increase of BACE-1 protein and beta-secretase activity in some Alzheimer's disease patients, although a corresponding increase of transcript has not been reported. Here we show that BACE-1 translation could be modulated at multiple stages. The presence of several upstream ATGs strongly reduces the translation of the main open reading frame. This inhibition could be overcome with conditions that favour skipping of upstream ATGs. We also report an alternative splicing of the BACE-1 transcript leader that reduces the number of upstream ATGs. Finally, we show that translation driven by the BACE-1 transcript leader is increased in activated astrocytes independently of the splicing event, indicating yet another mechanism of translational control. Our findings might explain why increases in BACE-1 protein or activity are reported in the brain of Alzheimer's disease patients even in the absence of changes in transcript levels.

Number:  526
UID:  15023535
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'association', 'associated', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulate', 'regulate', 'regulated', 'regulated', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  It has been proposed that ligand-dependent Regulated Intramembrane Proteolysis (RIP) of ErbB-4 receptors generates 80 kDa Intra-Cellular Domains (E4.ICDs) that relocate to the nuclear compartments where they implement the signaling abilities of the ErbB-4 receptors. The E4.ICD may directly regulate gene transcription or, in an alternative scenario, the tyrosine kinase activity of E4.ICDs may target proteins involved in transcriptional regulation upon its relocation into the nucleus. We have identified the transcriptional coactivator YAP65, here referred as YAP (Yes Associated Protein), as binding partner of ErbB-4 in a two hybrid screening in yeast. Interaction between YAP and ErbB-4 occurs via the WW domain of YAP and the PPPPY at positions 1297-1301 and the PPPAY at positions 1052-1056 of the amino acid sequence of the Cyt-1 isoform of ErbB-4. Stechiometry of binding is regulated by the ligand-dependent phosphorylation of Tyr 1056 in the PPPAYTPM module that function as "biochemical switch" to decrease the association of YAP to ErbB-4. In principle, this novel interaction highlights new mechanisms of signaling propagation from the ErbB-4 receptors, offering supporting evidences that the E4.ICDs forms released following ligand-receptor engagement may recruit YAP and relocate to the nucleus to implement or regulate transcription.

Number:  527
UID:  15009669
Founded words:  ['mediated']
Abstract:  Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the presence in the brain of senile plaques which contain an amyloid core made of beta-amyloid peptide (Abeta). Abeta is produced by the cleavage of the amyloid precursor protein (APP). Since impairment of neuronal calcium signalling has been causally implicated in ageing and AD, we have investigated the influence of an influx of extracellular calcium on the metabolism of human APP in rat cortical neurones. We report that a high cytosolic calcium concentration, induced by neuronal depolarization, inhibits the alpha-secretase cleavage of APP and triggers the accumulation of intraneuronal C-terminal fragments produced by the beta-cleavage of the protein (CTFbeta). Increase in cytosolic calcium concentration specifically induces the production of large amounts of intraneuronal Abeta1-42, which is inhibited by nimodipine, a specific antagonist of l-type calcium channels. Moreover, calcium release from endoplasmic reticulum is not sufficient to induce the production of intraneuronal Abeta, which requires influx of extracellular calcium mediated by the capacitative calcium entry mechanism. Therefore, a sustained high concentration of cytosolic calcium is needed to induce the production of intraneuronal Abeta1-42 from human APP. Our results show that this accumulation of intraneuronal Abeta1-42 induces neuronal death, which is prevented by a functional gamma-secretase inhibitor.

Number:  528
UID:  14991462
Founded words:  ['activated']
Abstract:  The cleavage of APP by BACE initiates the amyloidogenic process in Alzheimer's disease (AD). We have generated transgenic mice expressing BACE and double transgenic mice expressing BACE and the Swedish mutations of APP (SwAPP) in neurons. BACE transgenic mice did not develop beta-amyloid plaques by age of 14 months, but showed intracellular beta-amyloid immunoreactivity that was co-localized with transgenic BACE in neurons. Abeta levels were increased and AD-like pathology was accelerated in double transgenic mice expressing both BACE and SwAPP. At two months of age, early signs of extracellular Abeta deposition and reactive astrocytes were found in double transgenic, but not in single transgenic mice. Furthermore, at four months, well defined beta-amyloid deposits surrounded by activated astrocytes could be detected in the double transgenic mice. We suggest that BACE overexpression is not sufficient to produce beta-amyloid plaques, but simultaneous expression of BACE and its substrate (SwAPP) leads to an accelerated amyloid plaque formation.

Number:  529
UID:  14981268
Founded words:  ['mediated', 'complex', 'complex', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  beta-Secretase [also known as the beta-site amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1)] is an enzyme involved in the production of A beta-amyloid plaques in the brains of patients with Alzheimer's disease. The enhanced production of this enzyme occurs without corresponding changes in BACE1 mRNA levels. The complex 5' leader of BACE1 mRNA contains three upstream ORFs (uORFs) preceding the BACE1 initiation codon. In this study, we investigated how this 5' leader affects translation efficiency as a first step in understanding the enhanced production of the enzyme in the disease. Using reporter constructs in transfected mammalian cell lines and cell-free lysates, we showed that the translation mediated by the BACE1 5' leader is cap-dependent and inhibited by cis-acting segments contained within the 5' leader. Disruption of the uORFs had no effect on translation in B104 cells, which was surprising because the first two AUGs reside in contexts able to function as initiation codons. Possible mechanisms to explain how ribosomes bypass the uORFs, including reinitiation, leaky scanning, and internal initiation of translation were found to be inconsistent with the data. The data are most consistent with a model in which ribosomes shunt uORF-containing segments of the 5' leader as the ribosomes move from the 5' end of the mRNA to the initiation codon. In PC12 cells, however, the second uORF appears to be translated. We hypothesize that the translation efficiency of the BACE1 initiation codon may be increased in patients with Alzheimer's disease by molecular mechanisms that enhance shunting or increase the relative accessibility the BACE1 initiation codon.

Number:  530
UID:  14756819
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'binding', 'binds', 'binding', 'complex', 'complexes', 'complex', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  The phosphotyrosine binding domain of the neuronal protein X11alpha/mint-1 binds to the C-terminus of amyloid precursor protein (APP) and inhibits catabolism to beta-amyloid (Abeta), but the mechanism of this effect is unclear. Coexpression of X11alpha or its PTB domain with APPswe inhibited secretion of Abeta40 but not APPsbetaswe, suggesting inhibition of gamma- but not beta-secretase. To further probe cleavage(s) inhibited by X11alpha, we coexpressed beta-secretase (BACE-1) or a component of the gamma-secretase complex (PS-1Delta9) with APP, APPswe, or C99, with and without X11alpha, in HEK293 cells. X11alpha suppressed the PS-1Delta9-induced increase in Abeta42 secretion generated from APPswe or C99. However, X11alpha did not impair BACE-1-mediated proteolysis of APP or APPswe to C99. In contrast to impaired gamma-cleavage of APPswe, X11alpha or its PTB domain did not inhibit gamma-cleavage of NotchDeltaE to NICD (the Notch intracellular domain). The X11alpha PDZ-PS.1Delta9 interaction did not affect gamma-cleavage activity. In a cell-free system, X11alpha did not inhibit the catabolism of APP C-terminal fragments. These data suggest that X11alpha may inhibit Abeta secretion from APP by impairing its trafficking to sites of active gamma-secretase complexes. By specifically targeting substrate instead of enzyme X11alpha may function as a relatively specific gamma-secretase inhibitor.

Number:  531
UID:  14724271
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulates', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  The gamma-secretase complex catalyzes intramembrane proteolysis of a number of transmembrane proteins, including amyloid precursor protein, Notch, ErbB4, and E-cadherin. gamma-Secretase is known to contain four major protein constituents: presenilin (PS), nicastrin, Aph-1, and Pen-2, all of which are integral membrane proteins. There is increasing evidence that the formation of the complex and the stability of the individual components are tightly controlled in the cell, assuring correct composition of functional complexes. In this report, we investigate the topology, localization, and mechanism for destabilization of Pen-2 in relation to PS function. We show that PS1 regulates the subcellular localization of Pen-2: in the absence of PS, Pen-2 is sequestered in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and not transported to post-ER compartments, where the mature gamma-secretase complexes reside. PS deficiency also leads to destabilization of Pen-2, which is alleviated by proteasome inhibitors. In keeping with this, we show that Pen-2, which adopts a hairpin structure with the N and C termini facing the luminal space, is ubiquitylated prior to degradation and presumably retrotranslocated from the ER to the cytoplasm. Collectively, our data suggest that failure to become incorporated into the gamma-secretase complex leads to degradation of Pen-2 through the ER-associated degradation-proteasome pathway.

Number:  532
UID:  14717586
Founded words:  ['interacts', 'interacts', 'interact', 'interact', 'associate', 'associate', 'associate', 'interacts', 'interacts', 'interact', 'interact', 'mediates', 'complex', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complex']
Abstract:  Gamma-secretase is a member of a new class of proteases with an intramembrane catalytic site and cleaves numerous type I membrane proteins, including the amyloid beta-protein precursor (APP) and the Notch receptor. Biochemical and genetic studies have identified four membrane proteins as components of gamma-secretase: a heterodimeric form of presenilin (PS), composed of its N- and C-terminal fragments (PS-NTF and PS-CTF, respectively), a highly glycosylated, mature form of nicastrin (NCT), Aph-1, and Pen-2. However, it is unclear how these components interact physically with each other and assemble into functional complexes. We and others recently found that Aph-1 interacts with a less glycosylated, immature form of nicastrin as an intermediate toward full assembly of gamma-secretase. Here we show that (1) the detergent dodecyl beta-d-maltoside (DDM) mediates the dissociation and inactivation of active gamma-secretase in a concentration-dependent manner, (2) DDM-dependent dissociation of the active gamma-secretase complex generates two major inactive complexes (Pen-2-PS1-NTF and mNCT-Aph-1) and two minor inactive complexes (mNCT-Aph1-PS1-CTF and PS1-NTF-PS1-CTF), and (3) Pen-2 can also associate with the PS holoprotein in complexes devoid of NCT and Aph-1. Taken together, our results demonstrate that Pen-2 interacts with PS-NTF within active gamma-secretase and offer a model for how the components of active gamma-secretase interact physically with each other.

Number:  533
UID:  14704149
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Presenilin (PS) is the presumptive catalytic component of the intramembrane aspartyl protease gamma-secretase complex. Recently a family of presenilin homologs was identified. One member of this family, signal peptide peptidase (SPP), has been shown to be a protease, which supports the hypothesis that PS and presenilin homologs are related intramembrane-cleaving aspartyl proteases. SPP has been reported as a glycoprotein of approximately 45 kDa. Our initial characterization of SPP isolated from human brain and cell lines demonstrated that SPP is primarily present as an SDS-stable approximately 95-kDa protein on Western blots. Upon heating or treatment of this approximately 95-kDa SPP band with acid, a approximately 45-kDa band could be resolved. Co-purification of two different epitope-tagged forms of SPP from a stably transfected cell line expressing both tagged versions demonstrated that the approximately 95-kDa band is a homodimer of SPP. Pulse-chase metabolic labeling studies demonstrated that the SPP homodimer assembles rapidly and is metabolically stable. In a glycerol velocity gradient, SPP sedimented from approximately 100-200 kDa. Significantly the SPP homodimer was specifically labeled by an active site-directed photoaffinity probe (III-63) for PS, indicating that the active sites of SPP and PS/gamma-secretase are similar and providing strong evidence that the homodimer is functionally active. Collectively these data suggest that SPP exists in vivo as a functional dimer.

Number:  534
UID:  14699153
Founded words:  ['activator', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulates', 'function', 'function', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Site-specific proteolysis of the amyloid-beta precursor protein (APP) by BACE 1 and gamma-secretase, a central event in Alzheimer disease, releases a large secreted extracellular fragment (called APP(S)), peptides of 40-43 residues derived from extracellular and transmembrane sequences (Abeta), and a short intracellular fragment (APP intracellular domain) that may function as a transcriptional activator in a complex with the adaptor protein Fe65 and the nuclear protein Tip60. APP is closely related to APP-like protein (APLP) 1 and APLP2, but only APP is known to be cleaved by BACE 1 and to be involved in Alzheimer disease. We now demonstrate that similar to APP, APLP1 and APLP2 are also cleaved by BACE 1 but not by ADAM 9, another APP protease, and also transactivate nuclear Tip60 in a complex with Fe65. Paradoxically, although BACE 1 cleavage appears to be specific for APP and APLPs, their cleavage sequences exhibit no homology, and a short sequence (7 amino acids) from APP that when placed close to the membrane converts a membrane protein that is normally not cleaved by BACE 1 into a BACE 1 substrate. Our data demonstrate that APLPs and APP are processed similarly to act via the same nuclear target, suggesting that BACE 1 cleavage regulates a common function of APP and APLPs in neurons.

Number:  535
UID:  14636066
Founded words:  ['bind', 'bind']
Abstract:  Cholesterol has been claimed to be involved in the generation and/or accumulation of amyloid beta protein (Abeta). However, the underlying molecular mechanisms have not been fully elucidated yet. Here, we have investigated the effect of membrane cholesterol content on gamma-secretase activity using Chinese hamster ovary cells stably expressing beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP) and either wild-type or N141I mutant-type presenilin 2. Cholesterol was acutely depleted from the isolated membrane by methyl-beta-cyclodextrin, and Abeta production was assessed in a cell-free assay system. Reduced cholesterol did not significantly alter the amounts of Abeta produced by either total cell membranes or cholesterol-rich low-density membrane domains. Even its extremely low levels in the latter domains did not affect Abeta production. This indicates that the membrane cholesterol content does not directly modulate the activity of gamma-secretase. To ascertain that gamma-secretase resides in cholesterol-rich membrane domains, low-density membrane domains were further fractionated with BCtheta (biotinylated theta-toxin nicked with subtilisin Carlsberg protease), which has recently been shown to bind selectively to rafts of intact cells. The membrane domains purified with BCtheta did indeed produce Abeta. These observations indicate that the gamma-cleavage required for generating Abeta occurs in rafts, but its activity is virtually cholesterol-independent.

Number:  536
UID:  14627705
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'association', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  The multipass membrane protein APH-1, found in the gamma-secretase complex together with presenilin, nicastrin, and PEN-2, is essential for Notch signaling in Caenorhabditis elegans embryos and is required for intramembrane proteolysis of Notch and beta-amyloid precursor protein in mammalian and Drosophila cells. In C. elegans, a mutation of the conserved transmembrane Gly123 in APH-1 (mutant or28) leads to a notch/glp-1 loss-of-function phenotype. In this study, we show that the corresponding mutation in mammalian APH-1aL (G122D) disrupts the physical interaction of APH-1aL with hypoglycosylated immature nicastrin and the presenilin holoprotein as well as with mature nicastrin, presenilin, and PEN-2. The G122D mutation also reduced gamma-secretase activity in intramembrane proteolysis of membrane-tethered Notch. Moreover, we found that the conserved transmembrane Gly122, Gly126, and Gly130 in the fourth transmembrane region of mammalian APH-1aL are part of the membrane helix-helix interaction GXXXG motif and are essential for the stable association of APH-1aL with presenilin, nicastrin, and PEN-2. These findings suggest that APH-1 plays a GXXXG-dependent scaffolding role in both the initial assembly and subsequent maturation and maintenance of the active gamma-secretase complex.

Number:  537
UID:  14625299
Founded words:  ['regulate', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Familial Alzheimer's disease (FAD) presenilin 1 (PS1) mutations give enhanced calcium responses upon different stimuli, attenuated capacitative calcium entry, an increased sensitivity of cells to undergo apoptosis, and increased gamma-secretase activity. We previously showed that the FAD mutation causing an exon 9 deletion in PS1 results in enhanced basal phospholipase C (PLC) activity (Cedazo-Minguez, A., Popescu, B. O., Ankarcrona, M., Nishimura, T., and Cowburn, R. F. (2002) J. Biol. Chem. 277, 36646-36655). To further elucidate the mechanisms by which PS1 interferes with PLC-calcium signaling, we studied the effect of two other FAD PS1 mutants (M146V and L250S) and two dominant negative PS1 mutants (D257A and D385N) on basal and carbachol-stimulated phosphoinositide (PI) hydrolysis and intracellular calcium concentrations ([Ca2+]i) in SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells. We found a significant increase in basal PI hydrolysis in PS1 M146V cells but not in PS1 L250S cells. Both PS1 M146V and PS1 L250S cells showed a significant increase in carbachol-induced [Ca2+]i as compared with nontransfected or wild type PS1 transfected cells. The elevated carbachol-induced [Ca2+]i signals were reversed by the PLC inhibitor neomycin, the ryanodine receptor antagonist dantrolene, the general aspartyl protease inhibitor pepstatin A, and the specific gamma-secretase inhibitor N-[N-(3,5-difluorophenacetyl)-L-alanyl]-S-phenylglycine t-butyl ester. The cells expressing either PS1 D257A or PS1 D385N had attenuated carbachol-stimulated PI hydrolysis and [Ca2+]i responses. In nontransfected or PS1 wild type transfected cells, N-[N-(3,5-difluorophenacetyl)-L-alanyl]-S-phenylglycine t-butyl ester and pepstatin A also attenuated both carbachol-stimulated PI hydrolysis and [Ca2+]i responses to levels found in PS1 D257A or PS1 D385N dominant negative cells. Our findings suggest that PS1 can regulate PLC activity and that this function is gamma-secretase activity-dependent.

Number:  538
UID:  14622115
Founded words:  ['activation', 'interactions', 'interaction', 'interactions', 'interaction', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Presenilin-1 (PS1), implicated as the active component of the gamma-secretase enzymatic complex, is known to cleave the cell surface receptor Notch1 after ligand binding. Here we directly visualize Notch1-PS1 interactions using a novel fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy assay to monitor fluorescence resonance energy transfer. We demonstrate that endogenous Notch1 and PS1 move into close proximity at the cell surface after activation of Notch1 by the Delta1 ligand. A constitutively active N-terminally truncated form of Notch1, an immediate substrate of the gamma-secretase complex, similarly is found in close proximity to PS1. Interestingly, this interaction remains in the presence of a potent gamma-secretase active site inhibitor. Thus ligand binding to Notch1 appears to result in access of truncated Notch1 to a putative docking site on the PS1-gamma-secretase complex. These results suggest a novel mechanism of ligand binding-mediated signal transduction of Notch1.

Number:  539
UID:  14615541
Founded words:  ['regulate', 'regulated']
Abstract:  A subset of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) has been shown to preferentially reduce the secretion of the highly amyloidogenic, 42-residue amyloid-beta peptide Abeta42. We found that Rho and its effector, Rho-associated kinase, preferentially regulated the amount of Abeta42 produced in vitro and that only those NSAIDs effective as Rho inhibitors lowered Abeta42. Administration of Y-27632, a selective Rock inhibitor, also preferentially lowered brain levels of Abeta42 in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer's disease. Thus, the Rho-Rock pathway may regulate amyloid precursor protein processing, and a subset of NSAIDs can reduce Abeta42 through inhibition of Rho activity.

Number:  540
UID:  14602727
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interacts', 'associated', 'interaction', 'interacts', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'function', 'function', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Two secretases are involved in the generation of amyloid beta-peptide, the principal component of amyloid plaques in the brains of Alzheimer's disease patients. While beta-secretase is a classical aspartyl protease, gamma-secretase activity is associated with a high molecular weight complex. One of the complex components, which is critically required for gamma-secretase activity is nicastrin (NCT). Here we investigate the assembly of NCT into the gamma-secretase complex. NCT mutants either lacking the entire cytoplasmic tail, the cytoplasmic tail, and the transmembrane domain (TMD), or containing a set of heterologous TMDs were expressed in cells with strongly reduced levels of endogenous NCT. Maturation of exogenous NCT, gamma-secretase complex formation and proteolytic function was then investigated. This revealed that the cytoplasmic tail of NCT is dispensable for gamma-secretase complex assembly and function. In contrast, the authentic TMD of NCT is critically required for the interaction with gamma-secretase complex components and for formation of an active gamma-secretase complex. Neither soluble NCT lacking any membrane anchor nor NCT containing a heterologous TMD were inserted into the gamma-secretase complex. We identified the N-terminal region of the NCT TMD as a functionally important entity of NCT. These data thus demonstrate that NCT interacts with other gamma-secretase complex components via its TMD.

Number:  541
UID:  14598313
Founded words:  ['functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  gamma-Secretase activity is involved in the generation of Abeta and therefore likely contributes to the pathology of Alzheimer's disease. Blocking this activity was seen as a major therapeutic target to slow down or arrest Abeta-related AD progression. This strategy seemed more doubtful when it was established that gamma-secretase also targets other substrates including Notch, a particularly important transmembrane protein involved in vital functions, at both embryonic and adulthood stages. We have described previously new non-peptidic inhibitors able to selectively inhibit Abeta cellular production in vitro without altering Notch pathway. We show here that in vivo, these inhibitors do not alter the Notch pathway responsible for somitogenesis in the zebrafish embryo. In addition, we document further the selectivity of JLK inhibitors by showing that, unlike other described gamma-secretase inhibitors, these agents do not affect E-cadherin processing. Finally, we establish that JLKs do not inhibit beta-site APP cleaving enzymes (BACE) 1 and BACE2, alpha-secretase, the proteasome, and GSK3beta kinase. Altogether, JLK inhibitors are the sole agents to date that are able to prevent Abeta production without triggering unwanted cleavages of other proteins.

Number:  542
UID:  14593096
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'association', 'associates', 'associates', 'interaction', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  APH-1, presenilin, nicastrin, and Pen-2 are proteins with varying membrane topologies that compose the gamma-secretase complex, which is responsible for the intramembrane proteolysis of several substrates including the amyloid precursor protein. APH-1 is known to be necessary for gamma-secretase activity, but its precise function in the complex is not fully understood, and its membrane topology has not been described, although it is predicted to traverse the membrane seven times. To investigate this, we used selective permeabilization of the plasma membrane and immunofluorescence microscopy to show that the C terminus of the APH-1 resides in the cytosolic space. Insertion of N-linked glycosylation sites into each of the hydrophilic loop domains and the N terminus of APH-1 showed that the N-terminal domain as well as loops 2, 4, and 6 could be glycosylated, whereas loops 1, 3, and 5 were not. Thus, APH-1 topologically resembles a seven-transmembrane domain receptor with the N terminus and even-numbered loops facing the endoplasmic reticulum lumen, and the C terminus and odd-numbered loops reside in the cytosolic space. By using these glycosylation mutants, we provide evidence that the association between nicastrin and APH-1 may occur very soon after APH-1 synthesis and that the interaction between these two proteins may rely more heavily on the transmembrane domains of APH-1 than on the loop domains. Furthermore, we found that APH-1 can be processed by several endoproteolytic events. One of these cleavages is strongly up-regulated by co-expression of nicastrin and generates a stable C-terminal fragment that associates with nicastrin.

Number:  543
UID:  14586007
Founded words:  ['activate']
Abstract:  Long-term treatment with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) reduces the risk for Alzheimer's disease (AD). To determine the mechanisms by which inflammation affects AD and how NSAIDs protect against it, we stimulated neuroblastoma cells stably transfected with amyloid precursor protein (APP) with proinflammatory cytokines, which increased the secretion of amyloid-beta and APP ectodomain. Addition of ibuprofen, indomethacin, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPARgamma) agonists, or cotransfection with PPARgamma cDNA reversed this effect. The inhibitory action of ibuprofen and indomethacin was suppressed by PPARgamma antagonists. Finally, we observed that the mRNA levels, expression, and enzymatic activity of beta-secretase were increased by immunostimulation and normalized by NSAIDs. In conclusion, proinflammatory cytokines activate beta-secretase, and NSAIDs inhibit this effect through PPARgamma.

Number:  544
UID:  14572450
Founded words:  ['activates', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  Recently, we showed that oxidative stress activates the expression and activity of the beta-site AbetaPP-cleaving enzyme (BACE), an aspartyl protease responsible for the beta-secretase cleavage of AbetaPP. The identification of compounds able to prevent the induction of this event is an important goal of therapeutic strategies for Alzheimer's disease (AD). Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) is an adrenal steroid that improves a variety of functions in the central nervous system. Moreover, a series of evidence suggests that DHEA displays antioxidant properties in different experimental models. In the present paper we show that pretreatment with DHEA is able to rescue the increase of mRNA expression, protein levels, and activity of BACE, produced by oxidative stress in NT2 neurons. BACE, being the enzyme that initiates the production of Abeta, is a drug target for AD. Our results imply that DHEA administration may slow down the AD pathological process, lowering Abeta accumulation.

Number:  545
UID:  14572442
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interaction', 'interactions', 'interaction', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Gamma-secretase is a proteolytic complex whose substrates include Notch, beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP), and several other type I transmembrane proteins. Presenilin (PS) and nicastrin are known components of this high-molecular-weight complex, and recent genetic screens in invertebrates have identified two additional gene products, Aph1 and Pen-2, as key factors in gamma-secretase activity. Here, we examined the interaction of the components of the gamma-secretase complex in Chinese hamster ovary cells stably expressing human forms of APP, PS1, Aph1, and Pen-2. Subcellular fractionation of membrane vesicles and subsequent coimmunoprecipitation of individual gamma-secretase components revealed that interactions among all proteins occurred in the Golgi/trans-Golgi network (TGN) compartments. Furthermore, incubation of the Golgi/TGN-enriched vesicles resulted in de novo generation of amyloid beta-protein and APP intracellular domain. Immunofluorescent staining of the individual gamma-secretase components supported our biochemical evidence that the gamma-secretase components assemble into the proteolytically active gamma-secretase complex in the Golgi/TGN compartment.

Number:  546
UID:  14567678
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'interact', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interact', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binds', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulate']
Abstract:  Memapsin 2 (beta-secretase) is a membrane-associated aspartic protease that initiates the hydrolysis of beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP) leading to the production of amyloid-beta and the onset of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Both memapsin 2 and APP are transported from the cell surface to endosomes where APP hydrolysis takes place. Thus, the intracellular transport mechanism of memapsin 2 is important for understanding the pathogenesis of AD. We have previously shown that the cytosolic domain of memapsin 2 contains an acid-cluster-dileucine (ACDL) motif that binds the VHS domain of GGA proteins (He et al. (2002) FEBS Lett. 524, 183-187). This mechanism is the presumed recognition step for the vesicular packaging of memapsin 2 for its transport to endosomes. The phosphorylation of a serine residue within the ACDL motif has been reported to regulate the recycling of memapsin 2 from early endosomes back to the cell surface. Here, we report a study on the memapsin 2/VHS domain interaction. Using isothermal titration calorimetry, the dissociation constant, K(d), values are 4.0 x 10(-4), 4.1 x 10(-4), and 3.1 x 10(-4) M for VHS domains from GGA1, GGA2, and GGA3, respectively. With the serine residue replaced by phosphoserine, the K(d) decreased about 10-, 4-, and 14-fold for the same three VHS domains. A crystal structure of the complex between memapsin 2 phosphoserine peptide and GGA1 VHS was solved at 2.6 A resolution. The side chain of the phosphoserine group does not interact with the VHS domain but forms an ionic interaction with the side chain of the C-terminal lysine of the ligand peptide. Energy calculation of the binding of native and phosphorylated peptides to VHS domains suggests that this intrapeptide ionic bond in solution may reduce the change in binding entropy and thus increase binding affinity.

Number:  547
UID:  14566063
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  Notch receptors and the amyloid precursor protein are type I membrane proteins that are proteolytically cleaved within their transmembrane domains by a presenilin (PS)-dependent gamma-secretase activity. In both proteins, two peptide bonds are hydrolyzed: one near the inner leaflet and the other in the middle of the transmembrane domain. Under saturating conditions the substrates compete with each other for proteolysis, but not for binding to PS. At least some Alzheimer's disease-causing PS mutations reside in proteins possessing low catalytic activity. We demonstrate (i) that differentially tagged PS molecules coimmunoprecipitate, and (ii) that PS N-terminal fragment dimers exist by using a photoaffinity probe based on a transition state analog gamma-secretase inhibitor. We propose that gamma-secretase contains a PS dimer in its catalytic core, that binding of substrate is at a site separate from the active site, and that substrate is cleaved at the interface of two PS molecules.

Number:  548
UID:  14527950
Founded words:  ['activation', 'binding', 'bind', 'binding', 'bind', 'mediate', 'mediate']
Abstract:  Members of the FE65 family of adaptor proteins, FE65, FE65L1, and FE65L2, bind the C-terminal region of the amyloid precursor protein (APP). Overexpression of FE65 and FE65L1 was previously reported to increase the levels of alpha-secretase-derived APP (APPs alpha). Increased beta-amyloid (A beta) generation was also observed in cells showing the FE65-dependent increase in APPs alpha. To understand the mechanism for the observed increase in both A beta and APPs alpha given that alpha-secretase cleavage of a single APP molecule precludes A beta generation, we examined the effects of FE65L1 overexpression on APP C-terminal fragments (APP CTFs). Our data show that FE65L1 potentiates gamma-secretase processing of APP CTFs, including the amyloidogenic CTF C99, accounting for the ability of FE65L1 to increase generation of APP C-terminal domain and A beta 40. The FE65L1 modulation of these processing events requires binding of FE65L1 to APP and APP CTFs and is not because of a direct effect on gamma-secretase activity, because Notch intracellular domain generation is not altered by FE65L1. Furthermore, enhanced APP CTF processing can be detected in early endosome vesicles but not in endoplasmic reticulum or Golgi membranes, suggesting that the effects of FE65L1 occur at or near the plasma membrane. Finally, although FE65L1 increases APP C-terminal domain production, it does not mediate the APP-dependent transcriptional activation observed with FE65.

Number:  549
UID:  14525989
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex', 'regulate']
Abstract:  Sequential cleavages of the amyloid beta-protein precursor (APP) by the beta- and gamma-secretases generate the amyloid beta-protein (A beta), which plays a central role in Alzheimer's disease. Previous work provided evidence for involvement of both the secretory and endocytic pathways in A beta generation. Here, we used HeLa cells stably expressing a tetracycline-regulated dominant-negative dynamin I (dyn K44A), which selectively inhibits receptor-mediated endocytosis, and analyzed the effects on the processing of endogenous APP. Upon induction of dyn K44A, levels of mature APP rose at the cell surface, consistent with retention of APP on the plasma membrane. The alpha-secretase cleavage products of APP were increased by dyn K44A, in that alpha-APPs in medium and the C83 C-terminal stub in the membrane both rose. The beta-secretase cleavage of APP, C99, also increased modestly. The use of specific gamma-secretase inhibitors to study the accumulation of alpha- and beta-cleavage products independent of their processing by gamma-secretase confirmed that retention of APP on the plasma membrane results in increased processing by both alpha- and beta-secretases. Unexpectedly, endogenous A beta secretion was significantly increased by dyn K44A, as detected by three distinct methods: metabolic labeling, immunoprecipitation/Western blotting, and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Levels of p3 (generated by sequential alpha- and gamma-cleavage) also rose. We conclude that endogenous A beta can be produced directly at the plasma membrane and that alterations in the degree of APP endocytosis may help regulate its production. Our findings are consistent with a role for the gamma-secretase complex in the processing of numerous single-transmembrane receptors at the cell surface.

Number:  550
UID:  14507929
Founded words:  ['mediates', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  The aspartyl protease BACE1 cleaves the amyloid precursor protein and the sialyltransferase ST6Gal I and is important in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease. The normal function of BACE1 and additional physiological substrates have not been identified. Here we show that BACE1 acts on the P-selectin glycoprotein ligand 1 (PSGL-1), which mediates leukocyte adhesion in inflammatory reactions. In human monocytic U937 and human embryonic kidney 293 cells expressing endogenous or transfected BACE1, PSGL-1 was cleaved by BACE1 to generate a soluble ectodomain and a C-terminal transmembrane fragment. No evidence of the cleavage fragment was seen in primary cells derived from mice deficient in BACE1. By using deletion constructs and enzymatic deglycosylation of the C-terminal PSGL-1 fragments, the cleavage site in PSGL-1 was mapped to the juxtamembrane region within the ectodomain. In an in vitro assay BACE1 catalyzed the formation of the PSGL-1 products seen in vivo. The cleavage occurred at a Leu-Ser peptide bond as identified by mass spectrometry using a synthetic peptide. We conclude that PSGL-1 is an additional substrate for BACE1.

Number:  551
UID:  14502086
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interact', 'association', 'associated', 'interaction', 'interact', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  It has been previously demonstrated that the Notch1 signalling pathway is impaired in presenilin-1 null cells. This observation suggests a role for presenilin-1 in the Notch1 developmental pathway, possibly through physical interaction. Here, we show that presenilin-1 and Notch1 do not interact directly with each other but are associated in the cell. These findings raise the possibility that the gamma-secretase cleavage occurs via a presenilin complex in association with a putative co-factor specific for the molecule that is being cleaved (e.g. Notch1, (beta-amyloid precursor protein, E-cadherin and ErbB-4, all of which are gamma-secretase substrates).

Number:  552
UID:  13678586
Founded words:  ['associated', 'associated', 'binds', 'complexes', 'regulates', 'functions', 'functions', 'function', 'function', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  Presenilin1 (PS1), a protein implicated in Alzheimer's disease (AD), forms complexes with N-cadherin, a transmembrane protein with important neuronal and synaptic functions. Here, we show that a PS1-dependent gamma-secretase protease activity promotes an epsilon-like cleavage of N-cadherin to produce its intracellular domain peptide, N-Cad/CTF2. NMDA receptor agonists stimulate N-Cad/CTF2 production suggesting that this receptor regulates the epsilon-cleavage of N-cadherin. N-Cad/CTF2 binds the transcription factor CBP and promotes its proteasomal degradation, inhibiting CRE-dependent transactivation. Thus, the PS1-dependent epsilon-cleavage product N-Cad/CTF2 functions as a potent repressor of CBP/CREB-mediated transcription. Importantly, PS1 mutations associated with familial AD (FAD) and a gamma-secretase dominant-negative mutation inhibit N-Cad/CTF2 production and upregulate CREB-mediated transcription indicating that FAD mutations cause a gain of transcriptional function by inhibiting production of transcriptional repressor N-Cad/CTF2. These data raise the possibility that FAD mutation-induced transcriptional abnormalities maybe causally related to the dementia associated with FAD.

Number:  553
UID:  12960155
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activation', 'activation', 'interactions', 'interactions', 'interactions', 'interactions', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Presenilin 1 (PS1) is a critical component of the gamma-secretase complex, which is involved in the cleavage of several substrates including the amyloid precursor protein (APP) and Notch1. Based on the fact that APP and Notch are processed by the same gamma-secretase, we postulated that APP and Notch compete for the enzyme activity. In this report, we examined the interactions between APP, Notch, and PS1 using the direct gamma-secretase substrates, Notch 1 Delta extracellular domain (N1DeltaEC) and APP carboxyl-terminal fragment of 99 amino acids, and measured the effects on amyloid-beta protein production and Notch signaling, respectively. Additionally, we tested the hypothesis that downstream effects on PS1 expression may coexist with the competition phenomenon. We observed significant competition between Notch and APP for gamma-secretase activity; transfection with either of two direct substrates of gamma-secretase led to a reduction in the gamma-cleaved products, Notch intracellular domain or amyloid-beta protein. In addition, however, we found that activation of the Notch signaling pathway, by either N1 Delta EC or Notch intracellular domain, induced down-regulation of PS1 gene expression. This finding suggests that Notch activation directly engages gamma-secretase and subsequently leads to diminished PS1 expression, suggesting a complex set of feedback interactions following Notch activation.

Number:  554
UID:  12917438
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interactions', 'interacted', 'association', 'associates', 'associate', 'associate', 'associate', 'associated', 'associated', 'associates', 'interactions', 'interactions', 'interacted', 'mediating', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulates']
Abstract:  Nicastrin (NCT) is a type I integral membrane protein that is one of the four essential components of the gamma-secretase complex, a protein assembly that catalyzes the intramembranous cleavage of the amyloid precursor protein and Notch. Other gamma-secretase components include presenilin-1 (PS1), APH-1, and PEN-2, all of which span the membrane multiple times. The mechanism by which NCT associates with the gamma-secretase complex and regulates its activity is unclear. To avoid the misfolding phenotype often associated with introducing deletions or mutations into heavily glycosylated and disulfide-bonded proteins such as NCT, we produced chimeras between human (hNCT) and Caenorhabditis elegans NCT (ceNCT). Although ceNCT did not associate with human gamma-secretase components, all of the ceNCT/hNCT chimeras interacted with gamma-secretase components from human, C. elegans, or both, indicating that they folded correctly. A region at the C-terminal end of hNCT, encompassing the last 50 residues of its ectodomain, the transmembrane domain, and the cytoplasmic domain was important for mediating interactions with human PS1, APH-1, and PEN-2. This finding is consistent with the fact that the bulk of the gamma-secretase complex proteins resides within the membrane, with relatively small extramembranous domains. Finally, hNCT associated with hAPH-1 in the absence of PS, consistent with NCT and APH-1 forming a subcomplex prior to association with PS1 and PEN-2 and indicating that the interactions between NCT with PS1 may be indirect or stabilized by the presence of APH-1.

Number:  555
UID:  12913006
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulating', 'regulated', 'regulating', 'function', 'function', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  The generation of biologically active proteins by regulated intramembrane proteolysis is a highly conserved mechanism in cell signaling. Presenilin-dependent gamma-secretase activity is responsible for the intramembrane proteolysis of selected type I membrane proteins, including beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP) and Notch. A small fraction of intracellular domains derived from both APP and Notch translocates to and appears to function in the nucleus, suggesting a generic role for gamma-secretase cleavage in nuclear signaling. Here we show that the p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75NTR) undergoes presenilin-dependent intramembrane proteolysis to yield the soluble p75-intracellular domain. The p75NTR is a multifunctional type I membrane protein that promotes neurotrophin-induced neuronal survival and differentiation by forming a heteromeric co-receptor complex with the Trk receptors. Mass spectrometric analysis revealed that gamma-secretase-mediated cleavage of p75NTR occurs at a position located in the middle of the transmembrane (TM) domain, which is reminiscent of the amyloid beta-peptide 40 (Abeta40) cleavage of APP and is topologically distinct from the major TM cleavage site of Notch 1. Size exclusion chromatography and co-immunoprecipitation analyses revealed that TrkA forms a molecular complex together with either full-length p75 or membrane-tethered C-terminal fragments. The p75-ICD was not recruited into the TrkA-containing high molecular weight complex, indicating that gamma-secretase-mediated removal of the p75 TM domain may perturb the interaction with TrkA. Independent of the possible nuclear function, our studies suggest that gamma-secretase-mediated p75NTR proteolysis plays a role in the formation/disassembly of the p75-TrkA receptor complex by regulating the availability of the p75 TM domain that is required for this interaction.

Number:  556
UID:  12901838
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'binding', 'binds', 'binding', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulator']
Abstract:  A neuropathological hallmark of Alzheimer's disease is the presence of amyloid plaques. The major constituent of these plaques, occurring largely in brain areas important for memory and cognition, is the 40-42 amyloid residues (Abeta). Abeta is derived from the amyloid protein precursor after cleavage by the recently identified beta-secretase (BACE1) and the putative gamma-secretase complex containing presenilin 1 (PS1). In an attempt to develop a functional secretase enzymatic assay in yeast we demonstrate a direct binding between BACE1 and PS1. This interaction was confirmed in vivo using coimmunoprecipitation and colocalization studies in human cultured cells. Our results show that PS1 preferably binds immature BACE1, thus possibly acting as a functional regulator of BACE1 maturation and/or activity.

Number:  557
UID:  12857759
Founded words:  ['activate']
Abstract:  Generation of the amyloid peptide through proteolytic processing of the amyloid precursor protein by beta- and gamma-secretases is central to the etiology of Alzheimer's disease. beta-secretase, known more widely as the beta-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1), has been identified as a transmembrane aspartic proteinase, and its ectodomain has been reported to be cleaved and secreted from cells in a soluble form. The extracellular domains of many diverse proteins are known to be cleaved and secreted from cells by a process known as ectodomain shedding. Here we confirm that the ectodomain of BACE1 is secreted from cells and that this processing is up-regulated by agents that activate protein kinase C. A metalloproteinase is involved in the cleavage of BACE1 as hydroxamic acid-based metalloproteinase inhibitors abolish the release of shed BACE1. Using potent and selective inhibitors, we demonstrate that ADAM10 is a strong candidate for the BACE1 sheddase. In addition, we show that the BACE1 sheddase is distinct from alpha-secretase and, importantly, that inhibition of BACE1 shedding does not influence amyloid precursor protein processing at the beta-site.

Number:  558
UID:  12857757
Founded words:  ['interacts', 'interacts', 'bind', 'bind', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  The gamma-secretase complex is an unusual multimeric protease responsible for the intramembrane cleavage of a variety of type 1 transmembrane proteins, including the beta-amyloid precursor protein and Notch. Genetic and biochemical data have revealed that this protease consists of the presenilin heterodimer, a highly glycosylated form of nicastrin, and the recently identified gene products, Aph-1 and Pen-2. Whereas current evidence supports the notion that presenilin comprises the active site of the protease and that the other three components are members of the active complex required for proteolytic activity, the individual roles of the three co-factors remain unclear. Here, we demonstrate that endogenous Aph-1 interacts with an immature species of nicastrin, forming a stable intermediate early in the assembly of the gamma-secretase complex, prior to the addition of presenilin and Pen-2. Our data suggest 1) that Aph-1 is involved in the early stages of gamma-secretase assembly through the stabilization and perhaps glycosylation of nicastrin and by scaffolding nicastrin to the immature gamma-secretase complex, and 2) that presenilin, and later Pen-2, bind to this intermediate during the formation of the mature protease.

Number:  559
UID:  12846562
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'mediated', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Gamma-secretase is the enzyme activity releasing the amyloid-beta peptide from membrane-bound processing intermediates derived from the beta-amyloid precursor protein. Cellular release and subsequent aggregation of the amyloid-beta peptide is thought to be causative for the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease. Gamma-secretase performs an unusual intramembranous cleavage and has been closely linked to a macromolecular complex containing presenilins. To generate a molecular probe for gamma-secretase, we have developed a novel biotinylated affinity ligand which is based on a specific inhibitor containing a hydroxyethylene dipeptide isostere, known to serve as a transition state analogue for aspartic proteinases. Using this probe we confirmed the presence of the presenilin heterodimer and mature nicastrin in the active enzyme complex and, furthermore, that substrate binding site(s) and active center(s) are spatially separated. Affinity precipitations suggest that only a discrete fraction of cellular presenilin is present in the active gamma-secretase complex and that both gamma(40)- and gamma(42)-activities are mediated by the same molecular entity. This was also reflected by a co-distribution of both enzyme activities in subcellular fractions enriched for trans-Golgi network membranes.

Number:  560
UID:  12843253
Founded words:  ['binds']
Abstract:  The amyloid beta peptide (Abeta) is a product of the sequential gamma- and beta-secretase cleavage of amyloid precursor protein. Inhibitors of secretase enzymes have been proposed as a potential therapeutic strategy in the treatment of Alzheimer's disease. Here, we investigate the effect of inhibiting these key enzymes on the viability of a range of cell types. Treatment of rat cortical neurons for 24 hr with secretase inhibitors or an antibody that binds Abeta resulted in a marked reduction in cell viability, as measured by MTT reduction. Incubation with secretase inhibitors caused similar effects on other neuronal cell types (rat cerebellar granule neurons and the human SH-SY5Y cell line). Interestingly, rat astrocytes and a number of non-neuronal cell lines investigated (HEK293, DDT1-FM2, and human teratorhabdoid tumor cells) were unaffected by incubation with secretase inhibitors. The coincubation of Abeta1-40 prevented the toxicity of secretase inhibitors in neuronal cells. Abeta1-40 was protective in a concentration-dependent manner, and its effects were significant at concentrations as low at 10 pm. Importantly, the protective effects of Abeta were Abeta size-form specific, with the Abeta1-42 size form affording limited protection and the Abeta25-35 size form having very little protective effect. The present study demonstrates that inhibition of beta-or gamma-secretase activity induces death in neuronal cells. Importantly, this toxicity, which our data suggest is a consequence of a decline in neuronal Abeta levels, was absent in non-neuronal cells. This study further supports a key physiological role for the enigmatic Abeta peptide.

Number:  561
UID:  12843241
Founded words:  ['activate', 'associated', 'binding', 'binding', 'mediates', 'regulate', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  The 75 kDa neurotrophin receptor (p75NTR) and two neurotrophin receptor homologs (NRH1, NRH2) constitute a subfamily of the nerve growth factor/tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily. NRH1 coexists with p75NTR in fish, amphibians, and birds but is absent in mammals, whereas NRH2 exists only in mammals. Unlike p75NTR and NRH1, NRH2 lacks a canonical extracellular ligand binding domain. The similarity of NRH2 to the product of metalloproteinase cleavage of p75NTR prompted us to examine the cleavage of p75NTR in greater detail. p75NTR, NRH1, and NRH2 undergo multiple proteolytic cleavages that ultimately release cytoplasmic fragments. For p75NTR, cleavage in the extracellular domain by a PMA-inducible membrane metalloproteinase is followed by cleavage within or near the transmembrane domain, releasing the intracellular domain into the cytoplasm. This processing resembles the alpha- and gamma-secretase-mediated processing of beta-amyloid precursor protein and the similar processing of Notch. Although neurotrophins did not regulate p75NTR processing, the alpha- and gamma-secretase-mediated cleavage of p75 is modulated by receptor tyrosine kinases (Trks) TrkA and TrkB but not TrkC. Surprisingly, although NRH1 and NRH2 also undergo proteolytic cytoplasmic release of intracellular domains, a different protease mediates the cleavage. Furthermore, whereas the p75NTR soluble intracellular domain accumulates only in the presence of proteasome inhibitors, the equivalent fragment of NRH2 is stable and localizes in the nucleus. Because soluble intracellular domains of p75NTR and NRH2 were found to activate NF-kappaB in concert with TNF receptor associated factor 6 (TRAF6), we propose that cleavage of these proteins may serve conserved cytoplasmic and nuclear signaling functions through distinct proteases.

Number:  562
UID:  12842106
Founded words:  ['mediates']
Abstract:  The human beta-secretase enzyme, BACE1, mediates a critical step in the production of A beta(40) and A beta(42) peptides which are responsible for the severe neuronal cell death and insoluble amyloid plaques of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Several lines of evidence suggest that potent BACE1 inhibitors represent an attractive A beta-lowering strategy for AD. We designed a simple homogeneous time-resolved fluorescence (HTRF) assay which utilizes the fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) pair europium and allophycocyanin for measuring BACE1 enzymatic activity in a high-throughput manner. Robust FRET was observed when an 18-amino-acid APP Swedish-synthetic peptide that was N-terminally labeled with europium cryptate and C-terminally biotinylated was incubated with streptavidin-coupled cross-linked allophycocyanin (SA-XL665). Purified BACE1 enzyme caused a time- and concentration-dependent linear change in FRET at low nanomolar enzyme concentrations. This assay was used to compare the autoprocessed "mature" BACE1 enzyme (sautoBACe1) and the soluble proBACE1 for activity and inhibition by selected peptidic BACE inhibitors. sautoBACE1 displayed only a modest increase in activity compared to sproBACE1 and this activity was uninhibited by the BACE1 prodomain peptide. Interestingly, the BACE1 prodomain peptide was able to partially inhibit sproBACE1 activity. IC(50s) for a P10-P4' statine BACE1 inhibitor, OM99-2, and OM-003 determined using the HTRF assay were in good agreement with those reported in the literature. The primary advantages of the HTRF-formatted BACE1 protease assay include appropriate reflection of native BACE1 activity, high sensitivity, low variability, and intrinsic quench correction afforded by ratiometric measurements made between EuK and SA-XL665 fluorophores.

Number:  563
UID:  12840034
Founded words:  ['activating', 'mediating', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  The presenilin-gamma-secretase complex plays a critical role in mediating intramembranous proteolysis of several type I membrane proteins, including beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP) and Notch. We now show that deleted in colorectal cancer (DCC) is subject to proteolysis within the ectodomain segment both in cultured cells and in vivo and that the residual membrane-tethered DCC "stub" is subsequently processed by gamma-secretase to generate a derivative termed DCC-intracellular domain (ICD). The production of DCC-ICD is inhibited by selective gamma-secretase inhibitors, and by the expression of the dominant negative PS1 D385A variant. Moreover, the membrane-tethered DCC "stubs" accumulate to high levels in PS1-deficient embryos. We also demonstrate that expression of a DCC-Gal4 chimera is capable of activating transcription in a luciferase-based reporter assay and this activity is dependent on gamma-secretase activity. Our findings offer the proposal that DCC performs dual roles both as a cell surface receptor that modulates intracellular signaling pathways and as a transcriptional coactivator that relies on gamma-secretase-dependent production and nuclear translocation of the cytoplasmic domain.

Number:  564
UID:  12834808
Founded words:  ['associated', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulated', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  Presenilins (PS) constitute a fascinating family of proteins that play crucial roles in several major signalling processes involved in key cellular functions and are also closely associated with dysfunction in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Presenilin-dependent intramembrane cleavage of transmembrane proteins such as amyloid beta precursor protein (AbetaPP) and Notch resides in a high-molecular-weight gamma-secretase protein complex, of which at least five core components have now been identified. Remarkably, it has now become evident that presenilin-dependent gamma-secretase activity extends beyond its role in AbetaPP and Notch cleavages to have a generic role in the regulated intramembranous cleavage of certain membrane proteins. Actually, a new picture is emerging in which cells can relay signals from the extracellular space to their interior through presenilin-dependent proteolysis within the membrane-spanning regions of type 1 integral membrane proteins to generate potential transcriptionally active intracellular fragments. This review deals with the complex biology of presenilins and focuses more specifically on recent developments regarding the composition, assembly and regulation of the gamma-secretase protein complex, its substrates and its implications for cellular signalling.

Number:  565
UID:  12826675
Founded words:  ['activated', 'activating', 'activate', 'binding', 'binding', 'mediates', 'complexes', 'regulate', 'regulated', 'regulated']
Abstract:  The cleavage of Notch by presenilin (PS)/gamma-secretase is a salient example of regulated intramembrane proteolysis, an unusual mechanism of signal transduction. This cleavage is preceded by the binding of protein ligands to the Notch ectodomain, activating its shedding. We hypothesized that the Notch ligands, Delta and Jagged, themselves undergo PS-mediated regulated intramembrane proteolysis. Here, we show that the ectodomain of mammalian Jagged is cleaved by an A disintegrin and metalloprotease (ADAM) 17-like activity in cultured cells and in vivo, similar to the known cleavage of Drosophila Delta by Kuzbanian. The ectodomain shedding of ligand can be stimulated by Notch and yields membrane-tethered C-terminal fragments (CTFs) of Jagged and Delta that accumulate in cells expressing a dominant-negative form of PS or treated with gamma-secretase inhibitors. PS forms stable complexes with Delta and Jagged and with their respective CTFs. PS/gamma-secretase then mediates the cleavage of the latter to release the Delta and Jagged intracellular domains, a portion of which can enter the nucleus. The ligand CTFs compete with an activated form of Notch for cleavage by gamma-secretase and can thus inhibit Notch signaling in vitro. The soluble Jagged intracellular domain can activate gene expression via the transcription factor AP1, and this effect is counteracted by the co-expression of the gamma-secretase-cleaved product of Notch, Notch intracellular domain. We conclude that Delta and Jagged undergo ADAM-mediated ectodomain processing followed by PS-mediated intramembrane proteolysis to release signaling fragments. Thus, Notch and its cognate ligands are processed by the same molecular machinery and may antagonistically regulate each other's signaling.

Number:  566
UID:  12821663
Founded words:  ['mediated', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulated']
Abstract:  Intramembranous "gamma-secretase" processing of beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP) and other transmembrane proteins, including Notch, is mediated by a macromolecular complex consisting of presenilins (PSs), nicastrin (NCT), APH-1, and PEN-2. We now demonstrate that in cells coexpressing PS1, APH-1, and NCT, full-length PS1 accumulates to high levels and is fairly stable. Upon expression of PEN-2, the levels of PS1 holoprotein are significantly reduced, commensurate with an elevation in levels of PS1 fragments. These findings suggest that APH-1 and NCT are necessary for stabilization of full-length PS1 and that PEN-2 is critical for the proteolysis of stabilized PS1. In N2a and 293 cell lines that stably overexpress PS1, APH-1, NCT, and PEN-2, PS1 fragment levels are elevated by up to 10-fold over endogenous levels. In these cells, we find a marked accumulation of the APP-CTF gamma (AICD) fragment and a concomitant reduction in levels of both APP-CTF beta and CTF alpha. Moreover, the production of the gamma-secretase-generated Notch S3/NICD derivative is modestly elevated. However, we failed to observe a corresponding increase in levels of secreted A beta peptides in the medium of these cells. These results lead us to conclude that, although the PS1, APH-1, NCT, and PEN-2 are essential for gamma-secretase activity, the proteolysis of APP-CTF and Notch S2/NEXT are differentially regulated and require the activity of additional cofactors that promote production of AICD, NICD, and A beta.

Number:  567
UID:  12815710
Founded words:  ['activators', 'binding', 'binding', 'regulation', 'regulatory', 'regulation']
Abstract:  The pathogenic processing of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) into beta-amyloid peptides, which give rise to beta-amyloid plaques in the brains of Alzheimer's disease patients, requires the enzymatic activity of the beta-site APP-cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1). We report the cloning and sequence of a 1.5-kb DNA fragment upstream of the coding sequence of the rat BACE1 gene and the construction of a BACE1 promoter/luciferase reporter construct. The basal activity of this promoter construct was highest in neuronal cell lines such as BE(2)-C and PC12 and in the pancreatic cell line AR42J, somewhat lower in rat primary neurons, and astrocytic and microglial cultures, very low in hepatocytes, and almost absent in fibroblasts and in the monocyte-macrophage cell line RAW264.7. The first 600 bp of this promoter are highly conserved among rat, mouse, and human, suggesting that this region contains regulatory elements that modulate BACE1 transcription. Indeed, this fragment contains several putative transcription factor binding sites such as MZF1, Sp1, four GATA-1 sites, and one YY1 site. Directed mutagenesis of GATA-1 elements led to altered luciferase expression, indicating that these sites are involved in the regulation of BACE1 transcription. Additionally, the analysis of promoter activities of deletion mutants suggests the presence of activators of BACE1 transcription between bases -514 to -753 and of suppressor elements between bases -754 and -1541. The BACE1 promoter sequence data and the constructs described here will be useful to identify factors that influence the expression of BACE1 in experimental paradigms in vitro.

Number:  568
UID:  12815056
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  Nicastrin is a component of the gamma-secretase complex that has been shown to adhere to presenilin-1 (PS1), Notch, and APP. Here we demonstrate that Nicastrin-deficient mice showed a phenotype that is indistinguishable from PS1/PS2 double knock-out mice, whereas heterozygotes were healthy and viable. Fibroblasts derived from Nicastrin-deficient embryos were unable to generate amyloid beta-peptide and failed to release the intracellular domain of APP- or Notch1-Gal4-VP16 fusion proteins. Additionally, C- and N-terminal fragments of PS1 and the C-terminal fragments of PS2 were not detectable in Nicastrin-null fibroblasts, whereas full-length PS1 accumulated in null fibroblasts, indicating that Nicastrin is required for the endoproteolytic processing of presenilins. Interestingly, cells derived from Nicastrin heterozygotes produced relatively higher levels of amyloid beta-peptide whether the source was endogenous mouse or transfected human APP. These data demonstrate that Nicastrin is essential for the gamma-secretase cleavage of APP and Notch in mammalian cells and that Nicastrin has both positive and negative functions in the regulation of gamma-secretase activity.

Number:  569
UID:  12794186
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulated', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Notch signaling is involved in numerous cell fate decisions in invertebrates and vertebrates. The Notch receptor is a type I transmembrane (TM) protein that undergoes two proteolytic steps after ligand binding, first by an ADAM (a distintegrin and metalloprotease) in the extracellular region, followed by gamma-secretase-mediated cleavage inside the TM domain. We demonstrate here that the murine ligand Delta1 (Dll1) undergoes the same sequence of cleavages, in an apparently signal-independent manner. Identification of the ADAM-mediated shedding site localized 10 aa N-terminal to the TM domain has enabled us to generate a noncleavable mutant. Kuzbanian/ADAM10 is involved in this processing event, but other proteases can probably substitute for it. We then show that Dll1 is part of a high-molecular-weight complex containing presenilin1 and undergoes further cleavage by a gamma-secretase-like activity, therefore releasing the intracellular domain that localizes in part to the nucleus. Using the shedding-resistant mutant, we demonstrate that this gamma-secretase cleavage depends on prior ectodomain shedding. Therefore Dll1 is a substrate for regulated intramembrane proteolysis, and its intracellular region possibly fulfills a specific function in the nucleus.

Number:  570
UID:  12779321
Founded words:  ['regulated']
Abstract:  Regulated intramembrane proteolysis (RIP) of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) produces amyloid beta-protein (Abeta), the probable causative agent of Alzheimer's disease (AD), and is therefore an important target for therapeutic intervention. However, there is a burgeoning consensus that gamma-secretase, one of the proteases that generates Abeta, is also critical for the signal transduction of APP and a growing list of other receptors. APP is a member of a gene family that includes two amyloid precursor-like proteins, APLP1 and APLP2. Although APP and the APLPs undergo similar proteolytic processing, there is little information about the role of their gamma-secretase-generated intracellular domains (ICDs). Here, we show that APLP1 and 2 undergo presenilin-dependent RIP similar to APP, resulting in the release of a approximately 6 kDa ICD for each protein. Each of the ICDs are degraded by an insulin degrading enzyme-like activity, but they can be stabilized by members of the FE65 family and translocate to the nucleus. Given that modulation of APP processing is a therapeutic target and that the APLPs are processed in a manner similar to APP, any strategy aimed at altering APP proteolysis will have to take into account possible effects on signaling by APLP 1 and 2.

Number:  571
UID:  12773031
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  Novel benzodiazepine-containing gamma-secretase inhibitors for potential use in Alzheimer's disease have been designed that incorporate a substituted hydrocinnamide C-3 side chain. A syn combination of alpha-alkyl or aryl and beta-hydroxy or hydroxymethyl substituents was shown to give highly potent compounds. In particular, (2S,3R)-3-(3,4-difluorophenyl)-2-(4-fluorophenyl)-4-hydroxy-N-((3S)-2-oxo-5-phenyl-2,3-dihydro-1H-benzo[e][1,4]diazepin-3-yl)butyramide (34) demonstrated excellent in vitro potency (IC(50) = 0.06 nM). 34 could also be selectively methylated to give [(3)H]-28, which is of use in radioligand binding assays.

Number:  572
UID:  12763025
Founded words:  ['bind', 'bind', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  The characterization of the enzymes responsible for amyloid beta-peptide (Abeta) production is considered to be a primary goal towards the development of future therapeutics for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease. Inhibitors of gamma-secretase activity were critical in demonstrating that the presenilins (PSs) likely comprised at least part of the active site of the gamma-secretase enzyme complex, with two highly conserved membrane aspartates presumably acting as catalytic residues. However, whether or not these aspartates are actually the catalytic residues of the enzyme complex or are merely essential for normal PS function and/or maturation is still unknown. In this paper, we report the development of reactive inhibitors of gamma-secretase activity that are functionally irreversible. Since such inhibitors have been shown to bind catalytic residues in other aspartyl proteases (e.g., HIV protease), they might be used to determine if the transmembrane aspartates of PSs are involved directly in substrate cleavage.

Number:  573
UID:  12732196
Founded words:  ['interacts', 'interacts', 'mediates', 'regulated']
Abstract:  Mutant presenilins cause early-onset of familial Alzheimer's disease and render cells vulnerable to apoptosis. Calsenilin/DREAM/KChIP3 is a multifunctional calcium-binding protein that interacts with presenilin and mediates calcium-mediated apoptosis. In the present study, we report that the calsenilin-mediated apoptosis is regulated by presenilin. The expression of calsenilin was highly up-regulated in neuronal cells undergoing Abeta42-triggered cell death. The incidence of calsenilin-mediated apoptosis was diminished in presenilin-1(-/-) mouse embryonic fibroblast cells or neuronal cells stably expressing a loss-of-function presenilin-1 mutant. On the contrary, an array of familial Alzheimer's disease-associated presenilin mutants (gain-of-function) increased calsenilin-induced cell death. Moreover, gamma-secretase inhibitors, including compound E and DAPT, decreased the calsenilin-induced cell death. These results suggest that the pro-apoptotic activity of calsenilin coordinates with presenilin/gamma-secretase activity to play a crucial role in the neuronal death of Alzheimer's disease.

Number:  574
UID:  12719412
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'regulatory']
Abstract:  Transition state analogs pepstatin methylester (PME) and L685458 have been shown to inhibit gamma-secretase non-competitively (Tian, G., Sobotka-Briner, C., Zysk, J., Liu, X., Birr, C., Sylvester, M. A., Edwards, P. D., Scott, C. W., and Greenberg, B. D. (2002) J. Biol. Chem. 277, 31499-31505). This unusual kinetics suggests physical separation of the sites for substrate binding and catalysis with binding of the transition state analogs to the catalytic site and not to the substrate binding site. Methods of inhibitor cross-competition kinetics and competition ligand binding were utilized to address whether non-transition state small molecule inhibitors, which also display non-competitive inhibition of gamma-secretase, inhibit the enzyme by binding to the catalytic site as well. Inhibitor cross-competition kinetics indicated competitive binding between the transition state analogs PME and L685458 and between small molecules arylsulfonamides and benzodiazepines, but non-competitive binding between the transition state analogs and the small molecule inhibitors. These results were indicative of two inhibitor binding sites, one for transition state analogs and the other for non-transition state small molecule inhibitors. The presence of two inhibitor binding sites for two different classes of inhibitors was corroborated by results from competition ligand binding using [3H]L685458 as the radioligand. Although L685458 and PME displaced the radioligand at the same concentrations as for enzyme inhibition, arylsulfonamides and benzodiazepines did not displace the radioligand at their Ki values, a result consistent with the presence of two inhibitor binding sites. These findings provide useful insights into the catalytic and regulatory mechanisms of gamma-secretase that may facilitate the design of novel gamma-secretase inhibitors.

Number:  575
UID:  12714508
Founded words:  ['regulate']
Abstract:  The CX3C chemokine fractalkine (CX3CL1) exists as a membrane-expressed protein promoting cell-cell adhesion and as a soluble molecule inducing chemotaxis. Transmembrane CX3CL1 is converted into its soluble form by defined proteolytic cleavage (shedding), which can be enhanced by stimulation with phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA). PMA-induced CX3CL1 shedding has been shown to involve the tumor necrosis factor-alpha-converting enzyme (TACE), whereas the constitutive cleavage in unstimulated cells remains elusive. Here we demonstrate a role of the closely related disintegrin-like metalloproteinase 10 (ADAM10) in the constitutive CX3CL1 cleavage. The hydroxamate GW280264X, capable of blocking TACE as well as ADAM10, proved to be an effective inhibitor of the constitutive and the PMA-inducible CX3CL1 cleavage in CX3CL1-expressing ECV-304 cells (CX3CL1-ECV-304), whereas GI254023X, preferentially blocking ADAM10 but not TACE, reduced the constitutive cleavage only. Overexpression of ADAM10 in COS-7 cells enhanced constitutive cleavage of CX3CL1 and, more importantly, in murine fibroblasts deficient of ADAM10 constitutive CX3CL1 cleavage was markedly reduced. Thus, ADAM10 contributes to the constitutive shedding of CX3CL1 in unstimulated cells. Addressing the functional role of CX3CL1 shedding for the adhesion of monocytic cells via membrane-expressed CX3CL1, we found that THP-1 cells adhere to CX3CL1-ECV-304 cells but detach in the course of vigorous washing. Inhibition of ADAM10-mediated CX3CL1 shedding not only increased adhesive properties of CX3CL1-ECV-304 cells but also prevented de-adhesion of bound THP-1 cells. Our data demonstrate that ADAM10 is involved in the constitutive cleavage of CX3CL1 and thereby may regulate the recruitment of monocytic cells to CX3CL1-expressing cell layers.

Number:  576
UID:  12700243
Founded words:  ['association', 'association', 'complexes', 'regulated', 'function', 'function', 'function', 'function', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Ionotropic glutamate receptor (GluR) expression and function is regulated through multiple pre- and post-translational mechanisms. We find that limited proteolytic cleavage of GluR3 at two distinct sites generates stable GluR3 short forms that are glycosylated and found in association with other full-length GluRs in the mouse brain and cultured primary neurons. A combination of mutagenesis and transfection into HEK293 cells revealed cleavage by a gamma-secretase-like activity within the membrane-localized re-entry loop at or near the leucine-glycine pair (amino acids 585-586, GluR3sbeta) and a second site within a proline-rich PEST-like sequence in the first cytoplasmic loop (Asp570-Pro571, GluR3salpha). Generation of the prominent GluR3salpha form was effectively abolished in the mutant, GluR3D570A, but inhibitors of lysosomes, the proteasome, caspases, or calpains had no effect. The possible impact of cleavage on receptor function was suggested when the co-expression of the GluR3P571Stop mutant (creating GluR3salpha) co-assembled with other GluR subunits and decreased receptor function in Xenopus oocytes. In transiently transfected HEK293 cells, co-expression of GluR3salpha alters the relative association between GluR1 and GluR3 during assembly, and the presence of the novel C-terminal proline-rich domain of GluR3salpha imparts lateral membrane mobility to GluR complexes. These results suggest that limited proteolysis is another post-translational mechanism through which functional diversity and specialization between closely related GluR subunits is accomplished.

Number:  577
UID:  12692078
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'associated', 'interactions', 'binding', 'binding', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulating', 'regulating']
Abstract:  Gamma-secretase cleavage is the final proteolytic step that releases the amyloid beta-peptide (Abeta) from the amyloid beta-protein precursor (APP). Significant evidence indicates that the presenilins (PS) are catalytic components of a high molecular weight gamma-secretase complex. The glycoprotein nicastrin was recently identified as a functional unit of this complex based on 1) binding to PS and 2) the ability to modulate Abeta production following mutation of a conserved DYIGS region. In contrast to the initial report, we find that overexpression of wild-type (WT) nicastrin increases Abeta production, whereas DYIGS mutations (MT) have little or no effect. The increase in Abeta production is associated with an increase in gamma-secretase activity but not with a detectable increase in PS1 levels. Subcellular fractionation studies show that WT but not MT nicastrin matures into buoyant membrane fractions enriched in gamma-secretase activity. These data support the hypothesis that nicastrin is an essential component of the gamma-secretase complex. The finding that WT nicastrin overexpression can increase gamma-secretase activity without altering levels of the presumed catalytic component (PS) of the enzyme may point to a role for nicastrin in facilitating cleavage by regulating substrate interactions with the gamma-secretase complex.

Number:  578
UID:  12691659
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Gamma-Secretase cleaves the Amyloid Precursor Protein (APP) in its transmembrane domain, releasing the amyloid peptide Abeta. Abeta is the main constituent of the amyloid plaques in the brains of patients suffering from Alzheimer's disease. Several other type I integral membrane proteins are also cleaved by this protease. Recent work indicates that gamma-Secretase is a multiprotein complex consisting of Presenilin, Nicastrin, Aph-1, and Pen-2 and that all four proteins are necessary for full proteolytic activity. Since several paralogs and alternatively spliced variants of at least Presenilin and Aph-1 have been identified as well, it is anticipated that gamma-Secretase is not a homogeneous activity. Gamma-Secretase is an interesting but complex drug target that challenges classical thinking about proteolytic processing and intracellular signaling.

Number:  579
UID:  12665519
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  The amyloid beta peptides (Abeta) are the major components of the senile plaques characteristic of Alzheimer's disease. Abeta peptides are generated from the cleavage of amyloid precursor protein (APP) by beta- and gamma-secretases. Beta-secretase (BACE), a type-I transmembrane aspartyl protease, cleaves APP first to generate a 99-amino acid membrane-associated fragment (CT99) containing the N terminus of Abeta peptides. Gamma-secretase, a multi-protein complex, then cleaves within the transmembrane region of CT99 to generate the C termini of Abeta peptides. The production of Abeta peptides is, therefore, dependent on the activities of both BACE and gamma-secretase. The cleavage of APP by BACE is believed to be a prerequisite for gamma-secretase-mediated processing. In the present study, we provide evidence both in vitro and in cells that BACE-mediated cleavage between amino acid residues 34 and 35 (Abeta-34 site) in the Abeta region is dependent on gamma-secretase activity. In vitro, the Abeta-34 site is processed specifically by BACE1 and BACE2, but not by cathepsin D, a closely related aspartyl protease. Moreover, the cleavage of the Abeta-34 site by BACE1 or BACE2 occurred only when Abeta 1- 40 peptide, a gamma-secretase cleavage product, was used as substrate, not the non-cleaved CT99. In cells, overexpression of BACE1 or BACE2 dramatically increased the production of the Abeta 1-34 species. More importantly, the cellular production of Abeta 1-34 species induced by overexpression of BACE1 or BACE2 was blocked by a number of known gamma-secretase inhibitors in a concentration-dependent manner. These gamma-secretase inhibitors had no effect on enzymatic activity of BACE1 or BACE2 in vitro. Our data thus suggest that gamma-secretase cleavage of CT99 is a prerequisite for BACE-mediated processing at Abeta-34 site. Therefore, BACE and gamma-secretase activity can be mutually dependent.

Number:  580
UID:  12649271
Founded words:  ['associated', 'regulates']
Abstract:  The lipid second messenger ceramide regulates several biochemical events that occur during aging. In addition, its level is highly elevated in the amyloid-burdened brains of Alzheimer's disease patients. Here, we analyzed the impact of aberrant ceramide levels on amyloid beta-peptide (Abeta) generation by using a cell-permeable analog of ceramide, C6-ceramide, and several biochemical inhibitors of the sphingomyelin/glycosphingolipid biosynthetic pathway. We found that C6-ceramide increased the biogenesis of Abeta by affecting beta-but not gamma-cleavage of the amyloid precursor protein. Similarly to C6-ceramide, increased levels of endogenous ceramide induced by neutral sphingomyelinase treatment also promoted the biogenesis of Abeta. Conversely, fumonisin B1, which inhibits the biosynthesis of endogenous ceramide, reduced Abeta production. Exogenous C6-ceramide restored both intracellular ceramide levels and Abeta generation in fumonisin B1-treated cells. These events were specific for amyloid precursor protein and were not associated with apoptotic cell death. Pulse-chase and time-course degradation experiments showed that ceramide post-translationally stabilizes the beta-secretase BACE1. Taken together, these data indicate that the lipid second messenger ceramide, which is elevated in the brains of Alzheimer's disease patients, increases the half-life of BACE1 and thereby promotes Abeta biogenesis.

Number:  581
UID:  12644462
Founded words:  ['associated', 'associated', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulated', 'function', 'function', 'function', 'function', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Gamma-secretase is a high molecular weight multicomponent protein complex with an unusual intramembrane-cleaving aspartyl protease activity. Gamma-secretase is intimately associated with Alzheimer disease because it catalyzes the proteolytic cleavage, which leads to the liberation of amyloid beta-peptide. At least presenilin (PS), Nicastrin (Nct), APH-1, and PEN-2 are constituents of the gamma-secretase complex, with PS apparently providing the active site of gamma-secretase. Expression of gamma-secretase complex components is tightly regulated, however little is known about the assembly of the complex. Here we demonstrate that Nct undergoes a major conformational change during the assembly of the gamma-secretase complex. The conformational change is directly associated with gamma-secretase function and involves the entire Nct ectodomain. Loss of function mutations generated by deletions failed to undergo the conformational change. Furthermore, the conformational alteration did not occur in the absence of PS. Our data thus suggest that gamma-secretase function critically depends on the structural "activation" of Nct.

Number:  582
UID:  12639958
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interaction', 'association', 'interactions', 'interaction', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  PEN-2 is an integral membrane protein that is a necessary component of the gamma-secretase complex, which is central in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease and is also required for Notch signaling. In the absence of PEN-2, Notch signaling fails to guide normal development in Caenorhabditis elegans, and amyloid beta peptide is not generated from the amyloid precursor protein. Human PEN-2 is a 101-amino acid protein containing two putative transmembrane domains. To understand its interaction with other gamma-secretase components, it is important to know the membrane topology of each member of the complex. To characterize the membrane topology of PEN-2, we introduced single amino acid changes in each of the three hydrophilic regions of PEN-2 to generate N-linked glycosylation sites. We found that the N-linked glycosylation sites present in the N- and C-terminal domains of PEN-2 were utilized, whereas a site in the hydrophilic "loop" region connecting the two transmembrane domains was not. The addition of a carbohydrate structure in the N-terminal domain of PEN-2 prevented association with presenilin 1, whereas glycosylation in the C-terminal region of PEN-2 did not, suggesting that the N-terminal domain is important for interactions with presenilin 1. Immunofluorescence microscopy with selective permeabilization of the plasma membrane of cells expressing epitope-tagged forms of PEN-2 confirmed the lumenal location of both the N and C termini. A protease protection assay also demonstrated that the loop domain of PEN-2 is cytosolic. Thus, PEN-2 spans the membrane twice, with the N and C termini facing the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum.

Number:  583
UID:  12629514
Founded words:  ['regulation', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulation']
Abstract:  CD44 is the major adhesion molecule for the extracellular matrix components and is implicated in a wide variety of physiological and pathological processes including the regulation of tumor cell growth and metastasis. Our previous studies have shown that CD44 undergoes sequential proteolytic cleavages in the extracellular and transmembrane domains and the cleavage product derived from CD44 intramembranous cleavage acts as a signal transduction molecule. However, the underlying mechanism of the intramembranous cleavage of CD44 remains to be elucidated. In the present study, we report for the first time that CD44 is a substrate of the presenilin (PS)-dependent gamma-secretase. We demonstrate that the intramembranous cleavage of CD44 induced by 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate (TPA) treatment or mechanical scraping is blocked by gamma-secretase inhibitors in U251MG cells and that this cleavage is also inhibited in PS-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts. Furthermore, we showed that PS1 is redistributed to ruffling areas of the plasma membrane similarly to CD44 after TPA treatment, supporting our biochemical observation that PS1 is involved in the intramembranous cleavage of CD44. Our present findings suggest important implications for understanding CD44-dependent signal transduction and a potential role of PS/gamma-secretase activity in the functional regulation of adhesion molecules.

Number:  584
UID:  12618121
Founded words:  ['functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  BACE1 and BACE2 are recently discovered enzymes participating in processing of amyloid beta precursor protein (AbetaPP). Their discovery is contributing importantly to understanding the mechanism of amyloid-beta generation, and hence the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM) and hereditary inclusion-body myopathy (h-IBM) are progressive muscle diseases in which overproduction of AbetaPP and accumulation of its presumably toxic proteolytic product amyloid-beta (Abeta) in abnormal muscle fibers appear to play an important upstream role in the pathogenic cascade. In normal human muscle AbetaPP was also shown to be present and presumably playing a role (a) at neuromuscular junctions and (b) during muscle development. To investigate whether BACE1 and BACE2 play a role in normal and diseased human muscle, we have now studied them by immunocytochemistry and immunoblotting in 35 human muscle biopsies, including: 5 s-IBM; 5 chromosome-9p1-linked quadriceps-sparing h-IBM; and 25 control muscle biopsies. In addition, expression of BACE1 and BACE2 was studied in normal cultured human muscle. Our studies demonstrate that BACE1 and BACE2 (a) are expressed in normal adult muscle at the postsynaptic domain of neuromuscular junctions, and in cultured human muscle; (b) are accumulated in the form of plaque-like inclusions in both s-IBM and h-IBM vacuolated muscle fibers; and (c) are immunoreactive in necrotizing muscle fibers. Accordingly, BACE1 and BACE2 participate in normal and abnormal processes of human muscle, suggesting that their functions are broader than previously thought.

Number:  585
UID:  12606576
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activation', 'activate', 'activate', 'interacts', 'interacts']
Abstract:  The factors and mechanisms that transduce the intracellular signals sent upon activation of the receptor for the epidermal growth factor (EGFR) and related receptors are reasonably well understood and, in fact, are the targets of anti-tumor drugs. In contrast, less is known about the mechanisms implicated in sending the signals that activate these receptors. Here we show that when its proteolytic shedding is prevented, the transmembrane form of the transforming growth factor-alpha (proTGF-alpha) interacts with, but does not activate, the EGFR. Thus, shedding seems to control not only the availability of the soluble form of the growth factor (TGF-alpha) but also the activity of the transmembrane form. The activity of the protease responsible for the shedding of proTGF-alpha, tumor necrosis factor-alpha converting enzyme (TACE), is required for the activation of the EGFR in vivo and for the development of tumors in nude mice, indicating a crucial role of TACE in tumorigenesis. In agreement with this view, TACE is dramatically overexpressed in the majority of mammary tumors analyzed. Collectively, this evidence points to TACE as a promising target of anti-tumor therapy.

Number:  586
UID:  12586838
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interacts', 'interaction', 'interacts', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  beta-Site amyloid precursor protein (APP)-cleaving enzyme (BACE) is an integral membrane aspartic proteinase responsible for beta-site processing of APP, and its cytoplasmic region composed of 24 amino acid residues has been shown to be involved in the endosomal localization of BACE. With the yeast two-hybrid screening, we found that the cytoplasmic domain of phospholipid scramblase 1 (PLSCR1), a type II integral membrane protein, interacts with the cytoplasmic region of BACE. In cultured cells, BACE and PLSCR1 were colocalized in the Golgi area and in endosomal compartments, whereas they were co-redistributed in late endosome-derived multivesicular bodies when treated with U18666A, suggesting that both proteins share a common trafficking pathway in cells. Co-immunoprecipitation analysis showed that both proteins form a protein complex at an endogenous expression level in the human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Ycells, and the dileucine residue of the BACE tail is also revealed to be essential for the physical interaction with PLSCR1 in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, both BACE and PLSCR1 were localized in a low buoyant lipid microdomain in SH-SY5Y cells. The dileucine-defective BACE mutant was also fractionated into the lipid microdomain, but much less stably than wild-type BACE. Taken together, our current study suggests the functional involvement of PLSCR1 in the intracellular distribution of BACE and/or recruitment of BACE into the detergent-insoluble lipid raft.

Number:  587
UID:  12568494
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activation', 'activation', 'mediated']
Abstract:  Mucin, the major macromolecular component of mucus, is generally considered to be a protective substance. When overproduced in a variety of lung diseases, however, mucin gives rise to clinical problems such as airway obstruction and recurrent infection. Our approach to identifying drug targets for the control of mucin overproduction is the analysis of cellular signalling pathways linking stimuli in the diseased lung to mucin transcription. Here we show that mucin transcription in response to both gram-positive bacteria and tobacco smoke is mediated through activation of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). The mode of activation of EGFR in response to bacterial lipoteichoic acid involves cleavage of the transmembrane ligand HBEGF by ADAM 10, whereas the activation of EGFR in response to smoke involves cleavage of amphiregulin by ADAM 17.

Number:  588
UID:  12556458
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  The final step in A beta generation is the cleavage of the C-terminal 99 amino acid residues of the amyloid precursor protein by gamma-secretase. gamma-Secretase activity is closely linked to the multi-transmembrane-spanning proteins presenilin 1 and presenilin 2. To elucidate whether the cleavage site specificities of gamma-secretase leading to the formation of secreted and intracellular A beta are identical, we made use of point mutations close to the gamma-cleavage site, known to have a dramatic effect on the 42/40 ratio of secreted A beta. We found that the selected point mutations only marginally influenced the 42/40 ratio of intracellular A beta, suggesting differences in the gamma-secretase cleavage site specificity for the generation of secreted and intracellular A beta. The analysis of the subcellular compartments involved in the generation of intracellular A beta revealed that A beta is not generated in the early secretory pathway in the human SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cell line. In this study we identified late Golgi compartments to be involved in the generation of intracellular A beta. Moreover, we demonstrate that the presence of processed PS1 is not sufficient to obtain gamma-secretase processing of the truncated amyloid precursor protein construct C99, proposing the existence of an additional factor downstream of the endoplasmic reticulum and early Golgi required for the formation of an active gamma-secretase complex.

Number:  589
UID:  12551931
Founded words:  ['activators', 'interactions', 'interactions', 'mediate', 'mediated', 'mediate']
Abstract:  The evolutionary conserved Notch signaling pathway is involved in cell fate specification and mediated by molecular interactions between the Notch receptors and the Notch ligands, Delta, Serrate, and Jagged. In this report, we demonstrate that like Notch, Delta1 and Jagged2 are subject to presenilin (PS)-dependent, intramembranous "gamma-secretase" processing, resulting in the production of soluble intracellular derivatives. Moreover, and paralleling the observation that expression of familial Alzheimer's disease-linked mutant PS1 compromises production of Notch S3/NICD, we show that the PS-dependent production of Delta1 cytoplasmic derivatives are also reduced in cells expressing mutant PS1. These studies led us to conclude that a similar molecular apparatus is responsible for intramembranous processing of Notch and it's ligands. To assess the potential role of the cytoplasmic derivative on nuclear transcriptional events, we expressed a Delta1-Gal4VP16 chimera and demonstrated marked transcriptional stimulation of a luciferase-based reporter. Our findings offer the proposal that Delta1 and Jagged2 play dual roles as activators of Notch receptor signaling and as receptors that mediate nuclear signaling events via gamma-secretase-generated cytoplasmic domains.

Number:  590
UID:  12515548
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Gamma-secretase is an intramembrane-cleaving protease whose substrates include Notch and the amyloid precursor protein (APP). On the basis of initial genetic and pharmacologic data, the gamma-secretase activity responsible for cleavage of both proteins appears to be identical. However, apparent differences in the cleavage site and in sequence specificity raise questions about the degree of similarity between Notch and APP gamma-like proteolysis. In an effort to resolve this issue directly, we established an in vitro gamma-secretase activity assay that cleaves both APP- and Notch-based substrates, C100Flag and N100Flag. Analysis with specific gamma-secretase inhibitors, dominant-negative gamma-secretase preparations, and antibody co-immunoprecipitations all demonstrated identical cleavage of these substrates. Most importantly, we found that these substrates prevented cleavage of each other, indicating that the same gamma-secretase complex can cleave either protein. Finally, we provide evidence that both substrates are cut at two distinct regions in the transmembrane domain. These data resolve some of the apparent conflicts and strongly indicate that Notch and APP are proteolyzed by the same enzyme(s).

Number:  591
UID:  12475894
Founded words:  ['activated', 'activated']
Abstract:  Cells can release membrane components in a soluble form and as membrane vesicles. L1, an important molecule for cell migration of neural and tumor cells, is released by membrane-proximal cleavage, and soluble L1 promotes cell migration. Release of L1 is enhanced by shedding inducers such as phorbol ester and pervanadate, but it is also enhanced by depletion of cellular cholesterol with methyl-beta-cyclodextrin (MCD). How such different compounds can induce shedding is presently unknown. We show here that ADAM10 is involved in L1 cleavage, which occurs at the cell surface and in the Golgi apparatus. MCD and pervanadate treatment induced the release of microvesicles containing full-length L1 and the active form of ADAM10. L1 cleavage occurred in isolated vesicles. L1-containing microvesicles could trigger haptotactic cell migration. Only the neural L1 form carrying the RSLE signal for clathrin-dependent endocytosis was recruited and cleaved in vesicles. Phorbol ester treatment activated L1 cleavage predominantly at the cell surface. Our results provide evidence for two pathways of L1 cleavage, based on ADAM10 localization, that can be activated differentially: 1) direct cleavage at the cell surface, and 2) release and cleavage in secretory vesicles most likely derived from the Golgi apparatus. The findings establish a novel role for ADAM10 as a vesicle-based protease.

Number:  592
UID:  12472881
Founded words:  ['activation', 'regulated']
Abstract:  Alzheimer's disease (AD) is more prevalent following an ischemic or hypoxic episode, such as stroke. Indeed, brain levels of amyloid precursor protein (APP) and the cytotoxic amyloid beta peptide (Abeta) fragment are enhanced in these patients and in animal models following experimental ischaemia. We have investigated the effect of chronic hypoxia (CH; 2.5% O2, 24 h) on processing of APP in the human neuroblastoma, SH-SY5Y. We demonstrate that constitutive and muscarinic-receptor-enhanced secretion of the alpha-secretase cleaved fragment of APP, sAPPalpha, was reduced by approximately 60% in CH cells. The caspase inhibitor BOC-D(Ome)FMK did not reverse this effect of CH, and CH cells were as viable as controls, based on MTT assays. Thus, loss of sAPPalpha is not related to cell death or caspase processing of APP. Pre-incubation with antioxidants did not reverse the effect of CH, and the effect could not be mimicked by H2O2, discounting the involvement of reactive oxygen species in hypoxic loss of sAPPalpha. CH did not affect muscarinic activation of extracellular-signal regulated kinase. However, expression of ADAM 10 (widely believed to be alpha-secretase) was decreased approximately 50% following CH. Thus, CH selectively decreases processing of APP by the alpha-secretase pathway, most likely by decreasing levels of ADAM 10.

Number:  593
UID:  12470641
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'binds', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'functions', 'function', 'function', 'function', 'function', 'functions']
Abstract:  Presenilins (PS) are involved in gamma-secretase-mediated processing of beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP) and the Notch family of proteins. In addition, presenilin 1 (PS-1) binds to members of the armadillo family of proteins. In this study the relationship between PS-1-mediated proteolytic activity and PS-1-mediated regulation of beta-catenin function was investigated. Incubation of cells with a potent, small molecule gamma-secretase inhibitor did not affect PS-1/beta-catenin interaction as determined by co-immunoprecipitation, or affect the regulation of beta-catenin turnover, as determined by pulse-chase analysis, even at inhibitor concentrations that completely blocked PS-mediated APP processing. Moreover, inhibition of PS-1-mediated proteolytic activity did not affect beta-catenin trafficking, as determined by immunolocalization and immunoblotting, or beta-catenin-mediated transcription. These results indicate that PS-1-mediated regulation of gamma-secretase activity and PS-1-mediated regulation of beta-catenin function can be pharmacologically separated and support the idea that these are distinct functions.

Number:  594
UID:  12460547
Founded words:  ['regulates']
Abstract:  Presenilin 1 (PS1) and presenilin 2 play a critical role in the gamma-secretase processing of amyloid precursor protein (APP) and Notch1. Here, we investigate maturation and intracellular trafficking of APP and other membrane proteins in cells expressing an experimental PS1 deletion mutant (deltaM1,2). Stable expression of deltaM1,2 impairs gamma-secretase processing of Notch1 and delays Abeta secretion. Kinetic studies show enhanced O-glycosylation and sialylation of holo-APP and marked accumulation of APP COOH-terminal fragments (CTFs). Surface biotinylation, live staining, and trafficking studies show increased surface accumulation of holo-APP and CTFs in deltaM1,2 cells resulting from enhanced surface delivery of newly synthesized APP. Expression of a loss-of-function PS1 mutant (D385A) or incubation of cells with gamma-secretase inhibitors also increases surface levels of holo-APP and CTFs. In contrast to APP, glycosylation and surface accumulation of another type I membrane protein, nicastrin, are markedly reduced in deltaM1,2 cells. Finally, expression of deltaM1,2 results in the increased assembly and surface expression of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, illustrating that PS1's influence on protein trafficking extends beyond APP and other type I membrane protein substrates of gamma-secretase. Collectively, our findings provide evidence that PS1 regulates the glycosylation and intracellular trafficking of APP and select membrane proteins.

Number:  595
UID:  12458195
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  The steady-state kinetic mechanism of beta-amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzyme (BACE)-catalyzed proteolytic cleavage was evaluated using product and statine- (Stat(V)) or hydroxyethylene-containing (OM99-2) peptide inhibition data, solvent kinetic isotope effects, and proton NMR spectroscopy. The noncompetitive inhibition pattern observed for both cleavage products, together with the independence of Stat(V) inhibition on substrate concentration, suggests a uni-bi-iso kinetic mechanism. According to this mechanism, the enzyme undergoes multiple conformation changes during the catalytic cycle. If any of these steps are rate-limiting to turnover, an enzyme form preceding the rate-limiting conformational change should accumulate. An insignificant solvent kinetic isotope effect (SKIE) on k(cat)/K(m), a large inverse solvent kinetic isotope effect on k(cat), and the absence of any SKIE on the inhibition onset by Stat(V) during catalysis together indicate that the rate-limiting iso-step occurs after formation of a tetrahedral intermediate. A moderately short and strong hydrogen bond (at delta 13.0 ppm and phi of 0.6) has been observed by NMR spectroscopy in the enzyme-hydroxyethylene peptide (OM99-2) complex that presumably mimics the tetrahedral intermediate of catalysis. Collapse of this intermediate, involving multiple steps and interconversion of enzyme forms, has been suggested to impose a rate limitation, which is manifested in a significant SKIE on k(cat). Multiple enzyme forms and their distribution during catalysis were evaluated by measuring the SKIE on the noncompetitive (mixed) inhibition constants for the C-terminal reaction product. Large, normal SKIE values were observed for these inhibition constants, suggesting that both kinetic and thermodynamic components contribute to the K(ii) and K(is) expressions, as has been suggested for other iso-mechanism featuring enzymes. We propose that a conformational change related to the reprotonation of aspartates during or after the bond-breaking event is the rate-limiting segment in the catalytic reaction of beta-amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzyme, and ligands binding to other than the ground-state forms of the enzyme might provide inhibitors of greater pharmacological relevance.

Number:  596
UID:  12454007
Founded words:  ['association', 'association', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  The ErbB-4 receptor tyrosine kinase has a PDZ domain recognition motif at its carboxyl terminus. The first step in ErbB-4 proteolytic processing is a metalloprotease-dependent cleavage of the receptor ectodomain, which is not influenced by deletion of this motif. Metalloprotease cleavage of ErbB-4 produces a membrane-associated 80-kDa fragment that is a substrate for subsequent gamma-secretase cleavage, which releases the cytoplasmic domain from the membrane and allows nuclear translocation of this fragment. Deletion of the PDZ domain recognition motif does abrogate the gamma-secretase cleavage of ErbB-4. The wild-type 80-kDa ErbB-4 fragment forms an association complex with presenilin, thought to be the catalytic moiety of gamma-secretase activity. However, this association is significantly impaired by loss of the PDZ domain recognition motif from ErbB-4. Deletion of this ErbB-4 motif prevents the nuclear localization of the ErbB-4 cytoplasmic domain. Data also show that the basal cleavage of wild-type ErbB-4 by this proteolytic system can produce a sufficient level of ErbB-4 processing to negatively influence cell growth and that loss of the PDZ domain recognition motif abrogates this response.

Number:  597
UID:  12437577
Founded words:  ['interacts', 'interacts', 'mediate', 'mediate', 'complexes', 'regulated']
Abstract:  Nicastrin, a type-I transmembrane glycoprotein, is a necessary component of the high molecular weight presenilin (PS) complexes that mediate intramembranous cleavage of beta-amyloid precursor protein (betaAPP) and Notch. Nicastrin undergoes trafficking-dependent glycosylation maturation, and PS1 interacts preferentially with these maturely glycosylated forms of nicastrin. We investigated the effects of differing levels of the immature and mature endoglycosidase-H-resistant forms of nicastrin on Abeta40- and Abeta42-peptide secretion in several cell lines stably expressing a mutant nicastrin (D336A/Y337A) that increases Abeta secretion. There was no correlation between Abeta secretion and the level of over-expression of the immature forms of nicastrin. The total level of mature nicastrin remained constant, but mutant nicastrin replaced endogenous mature nicastrin in varying degrees. Differences in the levels of mature mutant nicastrin positively correlated with Abeta secretion, but did not influence either betaAPP trafficking or processing by alpha- and beta-secretases. Proper trafficking and terminal maturation of nicastrin is therefore a necessary event for the regulated intramembranous proteolysis of betaAPP.

Number:  598
UID:  12423367
Founded words:  ['functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  BACE2 (Memapsin 1) is a membrane-bound aspartic protease that is highly homologous with BACE1 (Memapsin 2). While BACE1 processes the amyloid precursor protein (APP) at a key step in generating the beta-amyloid peptide and presumably causes Alzheimer's disease (AD), BACE2 has not been demonstrated to be directly involved in APP processing, and its physiological functions remain to be determined. In vivo, BACE2 is expressed as a precursor protein containing pre-, pro-, protease, transmembrane, and cytosolic domains/peptides. To determine the enzymatic properties of BACE2, two variants of its pro-protease domain, pro-BACE2-T1 (PB2-T1) and pro-BACE2-T2 (PB2-T2), were constructed. They have been expressed in Escherichia coli as inclusion bodies, refolded and purified. These two recombinant proteins have the same N terminus but differ at their C-terminal ends: PB2-T1 ends at Pro466, on the boundary of the postulated transmembrane domain, and PB2-T2 ends at Ser431, close to the homologous ends of other aspartic proteases such as pepsin. While PB2-T1 shares similar substrate specificities with BACE1 and other 'general' aspartic proteases, the specificity of PB2-T2 is more constrained, apparently preferring to cleave at the NH2-terminal side of paired basic residues. Unlike other 'typical' aspartic proteases, which are active only under acidic conditions, the recombinant BACE2, PB2-T1, was active at a broad pH range. In addition, pro-BACE2 can be processed at its in vivo maturation site by BACE1.

Number:  599
UID:  12388554
Founded words:  ['associated', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Mutations in presenilin 1 (PS1) and PS2 genes contribute to the pathogenesis of early onset familial Alzheimer's disease by increasing secretion of the pathologically relevant Abeta42 polypeptides. PS genes are also implicated in Notch signaling through proteolytic processing of the Notch receptor in Caenorhabditis elegans, Drosophila melanogaster, and mammals. Here we show that Drosophila PS (Psn) protein undergoes endoproteolytic cleavage and forms a stable high molecular weight (HMW) complex in Drosophila S2 or mouse neuro2a (N2a) cells in a similar manner to mammalian PS. The loss-of-function recessive point mutations located in the C-terminal region of Psn, that cause an early pupal-lethal phenotype resembling Notch mutant in vivo, disrupted the HMW complex formation, and abolished gamma-secretase activities in cultured cells. The overexpression of Psn in mouse embryonic fibroblasts lacking PS1 and PS2 genes rescued the Notch processing. Moreover, disruption of the expression of Psn by double-stranded RNA-mediated interference completely abolished the gamma-secretase activity in S2 cells. Surprisingly, gamma-secretase activity dependent on wild-type Psn was associated with a drastic overproduction of Abeta1-42 from human betaAPP in N2a cells, but not in S2 cells. Our data suggest that the mechanism of gamma-secretase activities through formation of HMW PS complex, as well as its abolition by loss-of-function mutations located in the C terminus, are highly conserved features in Drosophila and mammals.

Number:  600
UID:  12358789
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interacts', 'interact', 'interactions', 'interacts', 'interact', 'complex', 'complex', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Amyloid-beta, the peptide that deposits as senile plaques in Alzheimer's disease, is derived from the amyloid precursor protein (APP) by a gamma secretase-mediated intramembranous cleavage. In addition to amyloid-beta, this cleavage produces a carboxyl-terminal intracellular fragment which has an unknown function. The carboxyl-terminal domain of APP interacts in the cytoplasm with an adapter protein, Fe65. We demonstrate by laser scanning confocal microscopy that a gamma secretase generated APP carboxyl-terminal domain, tagged with green fluorescent protein (GFP), translocates to the nucleus in a manner dependent upon stabilization by the adapter protein Fe65; APP which has been mutated to block interactions with Fe65 cannot be detected in the nucleus. The APP-CT domain continues to interact with Fe65 in the nucleus, as determined by both colocalization and fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET). Visualization of the APP-CT-Fe65 complex in the nucleus may serve as a readout for processes that modify gamma secretase release of APP-CT.

Number:  601
UID:  12356481
Founded words:  ['activation', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Human beta-secretase (BACE-1) is a type I integral membrane aspartic protease that catalyzes the internal cleavage of the amyloid precursor protein (APP), generating the N-terminus of the Abeta peptide. The generation and subsequent extracellular deposition of Abeta(1-42) peptide into amyloid plaques in the brain constitute one of the hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease (AD), a common debilitating neurodegenerative disorder. Inhibition of BACE-1 is considered an excellent therapeutic strategy against AD. To generate pure enzyme for protein crystallography and subsequent structure-based drug design, we have expressed a soluble, unglycosylated, 6xHis-tagged form of proBACE-1 in insect cells using baculovirus infection. To avoid production of a mixture of the pro-enzyme form and the mature form of BACE-1, the proprotein convertase furin was coexpressed with proBACE-1, leading to almost complete proteolytic activation of the recombinant enzyme. The mature enzyme was secreted in the conditioned medium of BACE-1/furin coinfected HighFive insect cells. Secreted BACE-1 protein was purified to homogeneity from the medium using subsequent Ni-chelate affinity chromatography, anion-exchange chromatography, hydrophobic interaction chromatography, and gel filtration. To avoid autoproteolysis, all purification steps were performed at pH values outside the activity range of BACE-1. The purified, biologically active enzyme was homogeneous on SDS/PAGE and had the expected sequence and molecular mass determined by N-terminal amino acid sequencing and mass spectrometry, respectively. Moreover, the preparation showed a single peak of the expected size with only 17% polydispersity using dynamic light scattering analysis. The yield of BACE-1 from fermentation cultures was approximately 0.1mg pure enzyme per liter of cell culture medium. The purified protein was successfully used to generate BACE-1/inhibitor co-crystals and to determine the crystal structure of the complex by X-ray analysis. The availability of substantial quantities of active, homogeneous enzyme will be of great help in future structure-based drug design efforts in the search for efficient protease inhibitor drugs to treat AD.

Number:  602
UID:  12297508
Founded words:  ['associates', 'associates', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Presenilin and nicastrin are essential components of the gamma-secretase complex that is required for the intramembrane proteolysis of an increasing number of membrane proteins including the amyloid-beta precursor protein (APP) and Notch. By using co-immunoprecipitation and nickel affinity pull-down approaches, we now show that mammalian APH-1 (mAPH-1), a conserved multipass membrane protein, physically associates with nicastrin and the heterodimers of the presenilin amino- and carboxyl-terminal fragments in human cell lines and in rat brain. Similar to the loss of presenilin or nicastrin, the inactivation of endogenous mAPH-1 using small interfering RNAs results in the decrease of presenilin levels, accumulation of gamma-secretase substrates (APP carboxyl-terminal fragments), and reduction of gamma-secretase products (amyloid-beta peptides and the intracellular domains of APP and Notch). These data indicate that mAPH-1 is probably a functional component of the gamma-secretase complex required for the intramembrane proteolysis of APP and Notch.

Number:  603
UID:  12270690
Founded words:  ['mediated']
Abstract:  Recently an aspartyl protease with beta-secretase activity called BACE was identified. In the present paper we showed that BACE is modulated by the oxidative stress product 4-hydroxynonenal (HNE). Exposure of NT(2) neurons to the two classical pro-oxidant stimuli ascorbate/FeSO(4) and H(2)O(2)/FeSO(4) resulted in a significant generation of HNE, which is temporally followed by an increased production of BACE protein levels. HNE mediated BACE induction is accompanied by a proportional elevation of carboxy-terminal fragments of amyloid precursor protein. Moreover, the direct relationship between BACE induction and lipid peroxidation products was strongly confirmed by the protection exerted by a short pretreatment with alpha-tocopherol, the most important antioxidant known to prevent the formation of aldehydic end-products of lipid peroxidation, including HNE. Our results support the hypothesis that oxidative stress and A beta production are strictly interrelated events and suggest that inhibition of BACE may have a therapeutic effect synergic with antioxidant compounds.

Number:  604
UID:  12206667
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  The structure of the catalytic domain of human memapsin 2 bound to an inhibitor OM00-3 (Glu-Leu-Asp-LeuAla-Val-Glu-Phe, K(i) = 0.3 nM, the asterisk denotes the hydroxyethylene transition-state isostere) has been determined at 2.1 A resolution. Uniquely defined in the structure are the locations of S(3)' and S(4)' subsites, which were not identified in the previous structure of memapsin 2 in complex with the inhibitor OM99-2 (Glu-Val-Asn-LeuAla-Ala-Glu-Phe, K(i) = 1 nM). Different binding modes for the P(2) and P(4) side chains are also observed. These new structural elements are useful for the design of new inhibitors. The structural and kinetic data indicate that the replacement of the P(2)' alanine in OM99-2 with a valine in OM00-3 stabilizes the binding of P(3)' and P(4)'.

Number:  605
UID:  12209127
Founded words:  ['mediated', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Many cell-surface receptors transmit signals to the nucleus through complex protein cascades. By contrast, the Notch signalling pathway uses a relatively direct mechanism, in which the intracellular domain of the receptor is liberated by intramembrane cleavage and translocates to the nucleus. This critical cleavage is mediated by the gamma-secretase complex, and new findings reveal that this mechanism is used by various receptors, although many questions remain about the biochemical details.

Number:  606
UID:  12198112
Founded words:  ['associated', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  The Alzheimer disease-associated presenilin (PS) proteins apparently provide the active site of gamma-secretase, an unusual intramembrane-cleaving aspartyl protease. PSs principally occur as high molecular weight protein complexes that contain nicastrin (Nct) and additional so far unidentified components. Recently, PEN-2 has been implicated in gamma-secretase function. Here we identify PEN-2 as a critical component of PS1/gamma-secretase and PS2/gamma-secretase complexes. Strikingly, in the absence of PS1 and PS1/PS2, PEN-2 levels are strongly reduced. Similarly, PEN-2 levels are reduced upon RNA interference-mediated down-regulation of Nct. On the other side, down-regulation of PEN-2 by RNA interference is associated with reduced PS levels, impaired Nct maturation, and deficient gamma-secretase complex formation. We conclude that PEN-2 is an integral gamma-secretase complex component and that gamma-secretase complex components are expressed in a coordinated manner.

Number:  607
UID:  12161439
Founded words:  ['regulators', 'regulator', 'regulation', 'regulation', 'regulated']
Abstract:  Presenilin (PS) is essential for gamma-cleavage, which is required for the generation of amyloid beta-protein (Abeta) from the beta-amyloid precursor protein. However, it remains to be clarified how gamma-cleavage is regulated. To elucidate the regulation of PS-mediated gamma-cleavage, we developed a new functional screening method for identifying cDNA that enhances gamma-cleavage. This screening system utilizes our own developed cell line, where the expression of cDNA that enhances gamma-cleavage confers puromycin resistance. The cDNA library is retrovirally delivered to the above-mentioned cell line, allowing the identification of our target cDNAs by a combination of puromycin resistance selection and Abeta assay screening. With this screening method, we isolated several cDNAs enhancing gamma-cleavage, including the previously reported Herp. Here we also demonstrate that Rab1A, identified with this screening, can be a regulator of Abeta generation. Thus, our established screening method is a powerful tool for identifying multiple regulators involved in gamma-cleavage in the Abeta generation pathway, including modulators of gamma-secretase activity or the intracellular trafficking of factors necessary for gamma-cleavage.

Number:  608
UID:  12135764
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'binds', 'binding', 'binding', 'mediated']
Abstract:  Memapsin 2, or beta-secretase, is a membrane-anchored aspartic protease that initiates the cleavage of beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP) leading to the production of beta-amyloid peptide in the brain and the onset of Alzheimer's disease. Memapsin 2 and APP are both endocytosed into endosomes for cleavage. Here we show that the cytosolic domain of memapsin 2, but not that of memapsin 1, binds the VHS domains of GGA1 and GGA2. Gel-immobilized VHS domains of GGA1 and GGA2 also bound to full-length memapsin 2 from cell mammalian lysates. Mutagenesis studies established that Asp(496), Leu(499) and Leu(500) were essential for the binding. The spacing of these three residues in memapsin 2 is identical to those in the cytosolic domains of mannose-6-phosphate receptors, sortilin and low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 3. These observations suggest that the endocytosis and intracellular transport of memapsin 2, mediated by its cytosolic domain, may involve the binding of GGA1 and GGA2.

Number:  609
UID:  12130643
Founded words:  ['association', 'complex', 'complex', 'complexes', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulatory', 'regulated', 'regulated']
Abstract:  The intramembranous proteolysis of Notch and the amyloid precursor protein by gamma-secretase exemplifies an unusual and newly recognized mechanism of signal transduction in multicellular organisms. Here, we show that only a form of nicastrin (NCT) containing N-linked complex oligosaccharides is present in active gamma-secretase complexes. Overexpression of NCT does not generate more of this mature protein, a phenomenon analogous to the strictly regulated formation of mature presenilin heterodimers from immature holoprotein. The absence of presenilin severely limits the maturation of NCT, yet combined overexpression of both proteins does not increase respective mature types. Taken together, our findings describe unusual regulatory features of this key signaling protease: the association of NCT with gamma-secretase is tightly regulated via glycosylation; at least one other cofactor exists; the least abundant member of the complex becomes limiting; and the cofactor that serves this role may vary by cell type.

Number:  610
UID:  12128088
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  The beta- and gamma-secretases cleave the amyloid protein precursor (APP) to release the amyloid protein (Abeta). While the beta-secretase has now been identified, the gamma-secretase remains an enigma. A number of mutations in the presenilins (PS) and APP have been shown to alter the cleavage specificity of gamma-secretase. However, the relationship between PS and gamma-secretase remains unclear. This article presents some models of gamma-secretase and suggests that the simplest interpretation of current data is that gamma-secretase is a complex of several proteases located in the lumen of secretory vesicles.

Number:  611
UID:  12119363
Founded words:  ['associated', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complexes']
Abstract:  BACE457 is a recently identified pancreatic isoform of human beta-secretase. We report that this membrane glycoprotein and its soluble variant are characterized by inefficient folding in the ER, leading to proteasome-mediated ER-associated degradation (ERAD). Dissection of the degradation process revealed that upon release from calnexin, extensively oxidized BACE457 transiently entered in disulfide-bonded complexes associated with the lumenal chaperones BiP and protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) before unfolding and dislocation into the cytosol for degradation. BACE457 and its lumenal variant accumulated in disulfide-bonded complexes, in the ER lumen, also when protein degradation was inhibited. The complexes were disassembled and the misfolded polypeptides were cleared from the ER upon reactivation of the degradation machinery. Our data offer new insights into the mechanism of ERAD by showing a sequential involvement of the calnexin and BiP/PDI chaperone systems. We report the unexpected transient formation of covalent complexes in the ER lumen during the ERAD process, and we show that PDI participates as an oxidoreductase and a redox-driven chaperone in the preparation of proteins for degradation from the mammalian ER.

Number:  612
UID:  12072428
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Cerebral deposition of amyloid beta-protein (A beta) is believed to play a key role in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease. Because A beta is produced from the processing of amyloid beta-protein precursor (APP) by beta- and gamma-secretases, these enzymes are considered important therapeutic targets for identification of drugs to treat Alzheimer's disease. Unlike beta-secretase, which is a monomeric aspartyl protease, gamma-secretase activity resides as part of a membrane-bound, high molecular weight, macromolecular complex. Pepstatin and L685458 are among several structural classes of gamma-secretase inhibitors identified so far. These compounds possess a hydroxyethylene dipeptide isostere of aspartyl protease transition state analogs, suggesting gamma-secretase may be an aspartyl protease. However, the mechanism of inhibition of gamma-secretase by pepstatin and L685458 has not been elucidated. In this study, we report that pepstatin A methylester and L685458 unexpectedly displayed linear non-competitive inhibition of gamma-secretase. Sulfonamides and benzodiazepines, which do not resemble transition state analogs of aspartyl proteases, also displayed potent, non-competitive inhibition of gamma-secretase. Models to rationalize how transition state analogs inhibit their targets by non-competitive inhibition are discussed.

Number:  613
UID:  12054541
Founded words:  ['activating', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  ADAM9 (MDC9, meltrin gamma) is a member of the ADAM family of metalloproteases, which play important roles in cell-cell fusion, intracellular signaling, and other cellular functions. Here we cloned a novel form of human ADAM9, designated hADAM9s (s for short), which lacks the carboxyl-terminus. Human ADAM9s was found to be secreted from transfected COS cells. RT-PCR analysis demonstrated that the mRNA for hADAM9s is expressed in human brain, liver, heart, kidney, lung, and trachea. When hADAM9s was co-expressed in COS cells with APP and treated with phorbol ester, the APP was digested exclusively at the alpha-secretory site. These results suggest that hADAM9s has an alpha-secretase-like activity for APP. Non-amyloidgenic cleavage of APP may occur at the plasma membrane. Our new results support a new therapeutic strategy to decrease in the Abeta content by directly activating ADAM9 in the extracellular space.

Number:  614
UID:  12054507
Founded words:  ['activates', 'binds', 'complexes']
Abstract:  Beta-amyloid peptide (Abeta) is generated through the proteolytic cleavage of beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP) by beta- and gamma-secretases. The beta-secretase, BACE1, initiates Abeta formation followed by gamma-cleavage within the APP transmembrane domain. Although BACE1 localizes in the transGolgi network (TGN), its physiological substrates and modulators are not known. In addition, the relationship to other secretase(s) also remains unidentified. Here, we demonstrate that BACE1 binds to nicastrin, a component of gamma-secretase complexes, in vitro, and that nicastrin activates beta-secretase activity in COS-7 cells.

Number:  615
UID:  12048259
Founded words:  ['associated', 'binding', 'binding', 'mediates', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complexes', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulate', 'function', 'function', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Amyloid beta-peptide (Abeta) is generated by the consecutive cuts of two membrane-bound proteases. Beta-secretase cuts at the N terminus of the Abeta domain, whereas gamma-secretase mediates the C-terminal cut. Recent evidence suggests that the presenilin (PS) proteins, PS1 and PS2, may be gamma-secretases. Because PSs principally exist as high molecular weight protein complexes, biologically active gamma-secretases likely require other cofactors such as nicastrin (Nct) for their activities. Here we show that preferentially mature Nct forms a stable complex with PSs. Furthermore, we have down-regulated Nct levels by using a highly specific and efficient RNA interference approach. Very similar to a loss of PS function, down-regulation of Nct levels leads to a massive accumulation of the C-terminal fragments of the beta-amyloid precursor protein. In addition, Abeta production was markedly reduced. Strikingly, down-regulation of Nct destabilized PS and strongly lowered levels of the high molecular weight PS1 complex. Interestingly, absence of the PS1 complex in PS1(-/-) cells was associated with a strong down-regulation of the levels of mature Nct, suggesting that binding to PS is required for trafficking of Nct through the secretory pathway. Based on these findings we conclude that Nct and PS regulate each other and determine gamma-secretase function via complex formation.

Number:  616
UID:  12016213
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interactions', 'interaction', 'interacts', 'interacts', 'associated', 'interactions', 'interactions', 'interaction', 'interacts', 'interacts', 'regulatory', 'regulatory', 'regulates', 'regulates']
Abstract:  X11 proteins have been shown to modulate metabolism of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) and to reduce the secretion of beta-amyloid peptides (Abeta) that are associated with Alzheimer's disease. Whereas X11alpha interacts with APP via its phosphotyrosine-binding domain, recent reports indicate that additional regulatory interactions involve the N terminus of X11. Here we report that the syntaxin-1a-binding protein Munc18a, which interacts with the Munc18a-interacting domain (MID) at the N terminus of X11, strongly regulates the actions of X11 on APP metabolism. When co-expressed with X11alpha, Munc18a potentiated the retention of APP and suppression of Abeta secretion by X11alpha. As a result, the constitutive release of Abeta40 was nearly abolished. Experiments using N terminus deletion mutants of X11alpha/beta and the MID-deficient X11gamma revealed that the majority of the regulatory effect by Munc18a occurred independent of a direct interaction of Munc18a with X11, although the presence of X11 was required. Munc18a expression induced a small increase in beta-secretase activity, whereas it also intensified the reduction in Abeta40 secretion by X11alpha. These data indicate that Munc18a in concert with X11 acts to suppress gamma-secretase processing. We conclude that Munc18a acts through direct and indirect interactions with X11 proteins and powerfully regulates APP metabolism and Abeta secretion.

Number:  617
UID:  12011466
Founded words:  ['activates', 'interaction', 'interaction', 'binds', 'binds', 'mediated', 'regulate', 'function', 'function', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  The beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP) and the Notch receptor undergo intramembranous proteolysis by the Presenilin-dependent gamma-secretase. The cleavage of APP by gamma-secretase releases amyloid-beta peptides, which have been implicated in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease, and the APP intracellular domain (AID), for which the function is not yet well understood. A similar gamma-secretase-mediated cleavage of the Notch receptor liberates the Notch intracellular domain (NICD). NICD translocates to the nucleus and activates the transcription of genes that regulate the generation, differentiation, and survival of neuronal cells. Hence, some of the effects of APP signaling and Alzheimer's disease pathology may be mediated by the interaction of APP and Notch. Here, we show that membrane-tethered APP binds to the cytosolic Notch inhibitors Numb and Numb-like in mouse brain lysates. AID also binds Numb and Numb-like, and represses Notch activity when released by APP. Thus, gamma-secretase may have opposing effects on Notch signaling; positive by cleaving Notch and generating NICD, and negative by processing APP and generating AID, which inhibits the function of NICD.

Number:  618
UID:  12009756
Founded words:  ['associated', 'associated', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Chronic accumulation of beta-amyloid in the brain has been shown to result in complex molecular and cellular changes that accompany neurodegeneration in Alzheimer's disease (AD). In this study, we examined the expression of a newly identified beta-secretase, memapsin 2 (M2) or beta-site APP cleaving enzyme in deparaffinized sections from 10 AD patients and 10 aged matched controls and in frozen samples of parietal cortex from 11 AD and 8 controls. M2 is mainly expressed in neurons, with high levels in CA4 to CA2 regions and transentorhinal cortex and low or intermediate levels in CA1, subiculum, and granule cells of the dentate gyrus. The majority of AD brains showed an increase of M2 expression in the CA1, but a decrease in the transentorhinal cortex. A subset of controls and AD patients had high M2 expression in parietal neocortex. Double-staining revealed that senile plaques are not directly associated with the soma of M2-expressing neurons. Neurofibrillary tangles were associated with lower M2 expression in AD. These data indicate that beta-secretase M2 may not be straightforwardly involved in amyloid plaque formation in AD brain.

Number:  619
UID:  11953314
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulator']
Abstract:  E-cadherin controls a wide array of cellular behaviors including cell-cell adhesion, differentiation and tissue development. Here we show that presenilin-1 (PS1), a protein involved in Alzheimer's disease, controls a gamma-secretase-like cleavage of E-cadherin. This cleavage is stimulated by apoptosis or calcium influx and occurs between human E-cadherin residues Leu731 and Arg732 at the membrane-cytoplasm interface. The PS1/gamma-secretase system cleaves both the full-length E-cadherin and a transmembrane C-terminal fragment, derived from a metalloproteinase cleavage after the E-cadherin ectodomain residue Pro700. The PS1/gamma-secretase cleavage dissociates E-cadherins, beta-catenin and alpha-catenin from the cytoskeleton, thus promoting disassembly of the E-cadherin-catenin adhesion complex. Furthermore, this cleavage releases the cytoplasmic E-cadherin to the cytosol and increases the levels of soluble beta- and alpha-catenins. Thus, the PS1/gamma-secretase system stimulates disassembly of the E-cadherin- catenin complex and increases the cytosolic pool of beta-catenin, a key regulator of the Wnt signaling pathway.

Number:  620
UID:  11939793
Founded words:  ['activated', 'regulating', 'regulated', 'regulated', 'regulating']
Abstract:  Multiple proteins are proteolytically shed from the membrane, including the amyloid precursor protein (APP) involved in Alzheimer's disease, the blood pressure regulating angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE), the low affinity IgE receptor CD23, and the inflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha). The inhibitory effect of a range of hydroxamic acid-based compounds on the secretases involved in cleaving and releasing these four proteins has been examined to build up a structure-activity relationship. Compounds have been identified that can discriminate between TNF-alpha convertase and the other three secretases (compound 15), between the shedding of CD23 and the shedding of APP and ACE (compound 21), and between the secretases and matrix metalloproteinase-1 (compound 22). The structure-activity relationship for the APP alpha-secretase and the ACE secretase were remarkably similar, and both secretases were activated in whole cell systems by the serine proteinase inhibitor 3,4-dichloroisocoumarin. The basal and carbachol-stimulated shedding of APP and ACE from human SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells could not be differentiated by any of the hydroxamate compounds, implying that the same or very similar activities are involved in the constitutive and regulated shedding of these two proteins. By utilizing a key discriminatory compound (compound 15) that potently inhibits TNF-alpha convertase but not alpha-secretase, we show that TNF-alpha convertase is not involved in the regulated shedding of APP from human neuronal cells. The compounds reported here will be useful in future studies aimed at identifying and validating candidate secretases.

Number:  621
UID:  11907044
Founded words:  ['interacts', 'interacts', 'bind', 'bind', 'mediated', 'complexes', 'regulate', 'functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  The low density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor-related protein (LRP) is a multifunctional cell surface receptor that interacts through its cytoplasmic tail with adaptor and scaffold proteins that participate in cellular signaling. Its extracellular domain, like that of the signaling receptor Notch and of amyloid precursor protein (APP), is proteolytically processed at multiple positions. This similarity led us to investigate whether LRP, like APP and Notch, might also be cleaved at a third, intramembranous or cytoplasmic site, resulting in the release of its intracellular domain. Using independent experimental approaches we demonstrate that the cytoplasmic domain is released by a gamma-secretase-like activity and that this event is modulated by protein kinase C. Furthermore, cytoplasmic adaptor proteins that bind to the LRP tail affect the subcellular localization of the free intracellular domain and may regulate putative signaling functions. Finally, we show that the degradation of the free tail fragment is mediated by the proteasome. These findings suggest a novel role for the intracellular domain of LRP that may involve the subcellular translocation of preassembled signaling complexes from the plasma membrane.

Number:  622
UID:  11906199
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Presenilin-1 (PS1) is a causative gene in early onset familial Alzheimer's disease (FAD). FAD-linked mutant PS1s significantly increased Abeta40 and Abeta42(43) levels (P < 0.001) and decreased the production of an 11.4 kD (beta-stub) and an 8.7 kD (alpha-stub) carboxyl-terminal fragment of amyloid beta precursor protein (betaAPP-CTFs) (P < 0.01). In the 2% CHAPS extracted lysates, the complex containing the amino-terminal fragment of PS1 (PS1-NTF), the carboxyl-terminal fragments of PS1 (PS1-CTF), and betaAPP-CTFs was identified. Incubation of this isolated complex at pH 6.4 showed the direct generation of Abeta40 and gamma-stub from this complex. This reaction was inhibited by a gamma-secretase inhibitor. The degrading rate of a co-precipitated beta-stub was facilitated under the presence of FAD-linked mutant PS1s. This findings suggest that the direct generation of Abeta from the complex may play an important role in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease.

Number:  623
UID:  11891288
Founded words:  ['activation', 'mediating']
Abstract:  Notch receptors undergo three distinct proteolytic cleavages during maturation and activation. The third cleavage occurs within the plasma membrane and results in the release and translocation of the intracellular domain into the nucleus to execute Notch signaling. This so-called gamma-secretase cleavage is under the control of presenilins, but it is not known whether presenilins themselves carry out the cleavage or whether they act by means of yet-unidentified gamma-secretase(s). In this article, we show that Notch intracellular cleavage in intact cells completely depends on presenilins. In contrast, partial purification of the Notch cleavage activity reveals an activity, which is present only in protein extracts from presenilin-containing cells, and which does not comigrate with presenilin. This finding provides evidence for the existence of a specific Notch-processing activity, which is physically distinct from presenilins. We conclude from these experiments that presenilins are critically required for Notch intracellular cleavage but are not themselves directly mediating the cleavage.

Number:  624
UID:  11876645
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  The final proteolytic step to generate the amyloid beta-protein (Abeta) of Alzheimer's disease (AD) from beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP) is achieved by presenilin (PS)-dependent gamma-secretase cleavage. AD-causing mutations in PS1 and PS2 result in a selective and significant increase in production of the more amyloidogenic Abeta42 peptide. PS1 and PS2 undergo endoproteolysis by an unknown enzyme termed presenilinase to generate the functional complex of N- and C-terminal fragments (NTF/CTF). To investigate the endoproteolytic activity that generates active PS, we used a mammalian cell-free system that allows de novo human PS NTF and CTF generation. PS NTF and CTF generation in vitro was observed in endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-enriched fractions of membrane vesicles and to a lesser extent in Golgi/trans-Golgi-network (TGN)-enriched fractions. AD-causing mutations in PS1 and PS2 did not alter de novo generation of PS fragments. Removal of peripheral membrane-associated and cytosolic proteins did not prevent de novo generation of fragments, indicating that presenilinase activity corresponds to an integral membrane protein. Among several general inhibitors of different protease classes that blocked the presenilinase activity, pepstatin A was the most potent inhibitor. Screening available transition state analogue gamma-secretase inhibitors led to the identification of two compounds that were able to prevent the de novo generation of PS fragments, with an expected inhibition of Abeta generation. Our studies provide a biochemical approach to characterize and identify this elusive presenilinase.

Number:  625
UID:  11839734
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  gamma-Secretase is an unusual intramembranous protease that has been reported to cleave the beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP) near the middle of its transmembrane domain (TMD) but cleave Notch near the cytoplasmic end of its TMD. To ascertain whether the TMD sequence of the substrate determines where gamma-secretase cleaves and whether the region just before the TMD participates in recognition by the enzyme, we expressed chimeric human APP molecules containing either the TMD or pre-TMD regions of Notch or other transmembrane proteins. APP chimeras bearing either the Notch or the amyloid precursor-like protein-2 TMD released similar amounts of approximately 4-kDa amyloid beta-peptide (Abeta)-like peptides as did intact APP. Mass spectrometry revealed that the principal Abeta-like peptide ended at residue 40, indicating cleavage at the middle of the Notch TMD in the chimera. Generation of Abeta-like peptides was significantly decreased when the APP TMD was replaced by those of SREBP-1 or human epithelial growth factor receptor 3. Replacement of the APP pre-TMD region (Abeta 10-28) with that of SREBP-1 increased generation of Abeta-like peptides, while those of human epithelial growth factor receptor 3 or amyloid precursor-like protein-2 decreased it. We conclude that gamma-secretase can cleave near the middle of the Notch TMD, that Abeta-like peptides may arise during Notch processing, and that the pre-TMD sequence of the substrate influences recognition or binding by the enzyme.

Number:  626
UID:  11820778
Founded words:  ['regulator']
Abstract:  Presenilins 1 and 2 are two transmembrane proteins that seem necessary for controlling the proteolytic cleavages of two substrates, betaAPP and Notch, giving rise to Abeta (amyloid beta-peptide) and NICD (Notch Intracellular Domain), respectively. It is a matter for discussion whether presenilins act directly as the cleaving enzyme (referred to as gamma-secretase) or indirectly as a regulator of the substrates/enzymes trafficking to the permissive cell compartment where gamma-secretase cleavage could occur. Here we examined whether betaAPP and Notch undergo mutually exclusive proteolytic events in HEK293 cells or whether they behave as substrates able to compete for a single protease. We show that the overexpression of mDeltaE-Notch-1 does not influence the endogenous recovery of secreted and intracellular Abeta nor those derived from betaAPP-overexpressing HEK293 cells. We establish, conversely, that increasing amounts of betaAPP do not modify the steady-state generation of NICD nor affect the kinetic of production. These data indicate that the proteolytic cleavages leading to the productions of Abeta and NICD are mutually exclusive events in HEK293 cells, and suggest that distinct proteolytic activities contribute to betaAPP and Notch processing.

Number:  627
UID:  11804702
Founded words:  ['functions', 'functions']
Abstract:  Presenilin 1-null mice die at birth from brain and skeletal developmental deformities due to disrupted Notch signaling. Presenilin 1-null mice also have severely reduced gamma-secretase cleavage of betaAPP. The assumption has been that facilitation of Notch signaling and betaAPP processing by presenilin 1 are analogous functions. Here we describe a presenilin 1-targetted mouse model that expresses extremely low levels ( approximately 1% of normal) of mutant PS1-M146L. Homozygous mice have significantly reduced viability due to a Notch-like phenotype. The animals that survive have severe axial skeletal deformities and markedly diminished gamma-secretase activity and accumulation of betaAPP-C100, but no obvious abnormalities in brain development. These results suggest that, in mice, a marked reduction of PS1-facilitated gamma-secretase activity is not detrimental to normal brain development.

Number:  628
UID:  11786905
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activation', 'activation', 'activates']
Abstract:  In the lungs of cystic fibrosis patients, overproduction of mucus leads to morbidity and mortality by obstructing airflow and shielding bacteria from antibiotics. Here we demonstrate that overproduction of mucus is a direct result of the activation of mucin gene expression by Gram-positive bacteria. Bacterial lipoteichoic acid activates the platelet-activating factor receptor, which is G protein-coupled. This results in activation of a disintegrin and metalloproteinase (ADAM10), kuzbanian, cleavage of pro heparin-binding epidermal growth factor and activation of the epidermal growth factor receptor. Unlike responses in macrophages, the epithelial-cell response to lipoteichoic acid does not require Toll-like receptor 2 or 4.

Number:  629
UID:  11771739
Founded words:  ['function', 'function', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  The availability of the DNA sequence of human chromosome 21 (HSA21) is a landmark contribution that will have an immediate impact on the study of the role of specific genes to Down syndrome (DS). Trisomy 21, full or partial, is a major cause of mental retardation and other phenotypic abnormalities, collectively known as Down syndrome (DS), a disorder affecting 1 in 700 births. The identification of genes on HSA21 and the elucidation of the function of the proteins encoded by these genes have been a major challenge for the human genome project and for research in DS. Over 100 of the estimated 300-500 genes of HSA21 have been identified, but the function of most remains largely unknown. It is believed that the overexpression of an unknown number of HSA21 genes is directly or indirectly responsible for the mental retardation and the other clinical features of DS. For this reason, HSA21 genes that are expressed in tissues affected in DS patients are of special interest.

Number:  630
UID:  11741961
Founded words:  ['mediate', 'mediate', 'functions', 'function', 'function', 'functions']
Abstract:  An unusual protease gamma-secretase requires functional presenilins and cleaves substrates (e.g. amyloid beta-protein precursor and Notch) with very loose amino acid sequence specificity within the transmembrane region. Here we report that ErbB4, a tyrosine kinase receptor for neuregulins, is a substrate for presenilin-dependent gamma-secretase. Our studies show that constitutive ectodomain shedding of full-length ErbB4 yields the approximately 80-kDa membrane-associated C-terminal fragment (B4-CTF). Subsequent intramembrane cleavage of the B4-CTF was inhibited in the cells devoid of functional presenilins or by treatment of cells with a gamma-secretase inhibitor, leading to enhanced accumulation of B4-CTF. Furthermore, an in vitro gamma-secretase assay demonstrated that the intracellular domain of ErbB4 (B4-ICD) was produced and subsequently released into the soluble fraction in a presenilin-dependent manner. We have also shown that ectopically expressed B4-ICD is localized to the nucleus, suggesting that the presenilin-dependent cleavage of ErbB4 generates the soluble B4-ICD that functions in the nucleus presumably at transcriptional level. Our study indicates that ErbB4 represents a first receptor tyrosine kinase that undergoes intramembrane proteolysis and may mediate a novel signaling function independent of its canonical role as a receptor tyrosine kinase. Our studies also support the idea that presenilins play a generic role in intramembrane cleavage of selected type I membrane proteins.

Number:  631
UID:  11716984
Founded words:  ['mediated']
Abstract:  The amyloid precursor protein (APP) undergoes two consecutive cleavages by different proteases, beta-secretase and gamma-secretase, leading to the release of an amyloidogenic 4 kDa fragment called amyloid beta (Abeta). Combining immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry, we characterized soluble Abeta in cultured cell media of mouse neuroblastoma N2a cells and double hAPP/hBACE-1 transfected HEK293. The major Abeta isoforms detected were Abeta11-34, Abeta1-34, Abeta11-40 and Abeta1-40. In this study, we demonstrate that overexpression of human beta-secretase (BACE-1) in HEK293 cells resulted in predominant Abeta cleavage at position Glu(11) rather than Asp(1), as well as increased production of Abeta(x)-34, but not Abeta(x)-40. Incubation of cells with a specific gamma-secretase inhibitor suggests that cleavage of APP at Leu(34) could be mediated by gamma-secretase itself or by a gamma-secretase dependent process.

Number:  632
UID:  11706054
Founded words:  ['regulatory', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  The L1 adhesion molecule plays an important role in axon guidance and cell migration in the nervous system. L1 is also expressed by many human carcinomas. In addition to cell surface expression, the L1 ectodomain can be released by a metalloproteinase, but the biological function of this process is unknown. Here we demonstrate that membrane-proximal cleavage of L1 can be detected in tumors and in the developing mouse brain. The shedding of L1 involved a disintegrin and metalloproteinase (ADAM)10, as transfection with dominant-negative ADAM10 completely abolishes L1 release. L1-transfected CHO cells (L1-CHO) showed enhanced haptotactic migration on fibronectin and laminin, which was blocked by antibodies to alpha v beta 5 and L1. Migration of L1-CHO cells, but not the basal migration of CHO cells, was blocked by a metalloproteinase inhibitor, indicating a role for L1 shedding in the migration process. CHO and metalloproteinase-inhibited L1-CHO cells were stimulated to migrate by soluble L1-Fc protein. The induction of migration was blocked by alpha v beta 5-specific antibodies and required Arg-Gly-Asp sites in L1. A 150-kD L1 fragment released by plasmin could also stimulate CHO cell migration. We propose that ectodomain-released L1 promotes migration by autocrine/paracrine stimulation via alpha v beta 5. This regulatory loop could be relevant for migratory processes under physiological and pathophysiological conditions.

Number:  633
UID:  11679632
Founded words:  ['activation', 'binding', 'binding', 'regulates']
Abstract:  ErbB-4 is a transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinase that regulates cell proliferation and differentiation. After binding of its ligand heregulin (HRG) or activation of protein kinase C (PKC) by 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA), the ErbB-4 ectodomain is cleaved by a metalloprotease. We now report a subsequent cleavage by gamma-secretase that releases the ErbB-4 intracellular domain from the membrane and facilitates its translocation to the nucleus. gamma-Secretase cleavage was prevented by chemical inhibitors or a dominant negative presenilin. Inhibition of gamma-secretase also prevented growth inhibition by HRG. gamma-Secretase cleavage of ErbB-4 may represent another mechanism for receptor tyrosine kinase-mediated signaling.

Number:  634
UID:  11593035
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Presenilin proteins play critical roles in the proteolytic processing of both Notch and amyloid precursor protein (APP). Presenilin itself undergoes endoproteolytic processing to generate an N-terminal and C-terminal fragment. As demonstrated previously, overexpression of presenilin 1 (PS1) holoprotein does not change the levels of the N-terminal and C-terminal fragments (NTF and CTF). When we coexpress the PS1 NTF and CTF, marked increases in the cellular levels of these fragments are seen. By coexpressing the PS1 NTF and CTF, we demonstrate conclusively that a noncovalent complex of the NTF and CTF is the active species of presenilin. However, although the PS1 NTF/CTF complex is necessary for gamma-secretase activity, it is not sufficient. Independent overexpression of the PS1 NTF and CTF was also used to show that the Asp-257 and Asp-385 mutations in PS1 decrease Abeta production by a direct effect on gamma-secretase activity and not by the inhibition of PS1 endoproteolysis.

Number:  635
UID:  11574530
Founded words:  ['interacts', 'interacts', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Intramembranous cleavage of the beta-amyloid precursor protein by gamma-secretase is the final processing event generating amyloid-beta peptides, which are thought to be causative agents for Alzheimer's disease. Missense mutations in the presenilin genes co-segregate with early-onset Alzheimer's disease, and, recently, a close biochemical linkage between presenilins and the identity of gamma-secretase has been established. Here we describe for the first time that certain potent gamma-secretase inhibitors are able to interfere with the endoproteolytic processing of presenilin 1 (PS1). In addition, we identified a novel gamma-secretase inhibitor, [1S-benzyl-4R-[1-(5-cyclohexyl-2-oxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-benzo[e][1,4]diazepin-3(R,S)-ylcarbamoyl)-S-ethylcarbamoyl]-2R-hydroxy-5-phenyl-pentyl]-carbamic acid tert-butyl ester (CBAP), which not only physically interacts with PS1, but upon chronic treatment produces a "pharmacological knock-down" of PS1 fragments. This indicates that the observed accumulation of full-length PS1 is caused by a direct inhibition of its endoproteolysis. The subsequent use of CBAP as a biological tool to increase full-length PS1 levels in the absence of exogenous PS1 expression has provided evidence that wild-type PS1 endoproteolysis is not required either for PS1/gamma-secretase complex assembly or trafficking. Furthermore, in cell-based systems CBAP does not completely recapitulate PS1 loss-of-function phenotypes. Even though the beta-amyloid precursor protein cleavage and the S3 cleavage of the Notch receptor are inhibited by CBAP, an impairment of Trk receptor maturation was not observed.

Number:  636
UID:  11520861
Founded words:  ['bind', 'bind']
Abstract:  The presenilin (PS)-dependent site 3 (S3) cleavage of Notch liberates its intracellular domain (NICD), which is required for Notch signaling. The similar gamma-secretase cleavage of the beta-amyloid precursor protein (betaAPP) results in the secretion of amyloid beta-peptide (Abeta). However, little is known about the corresponding C-terminal cleavage product (CTFgamma). We have now identified CTFgamma in brain tissue, in living cells, as well as in an in vitro system. Generation of CTFgamma is facilitated by PSs, since a dominant-negative mutation of PS as well as a PS gene knock out prevents its production. Moreover, gamma-secretase inhibitors, including one that is known to bind to PS, also block CTFgamma generation. Sequence analysis revealed that CTFgamma is produced by a novel gamma-secretase cut, which occurs at a site corresponding to the S3 cleavage of Notch.

Number:  637
UID:  11516173
Founded words:  ['regulatory']
Abstract:  Placental leucine aminopeptidase (P-LAP) is believed to play an important role in the inactivation of small regulatory peptides. P-LAP exists in both membrane-bound and soluble forms and cDNA cloning has demonstrated that P-LAP is a type II membrane protein, which means that its soluble form is released by a specific proteolytic cleavage. In this report, we studied this process in COS7 cells. Inhibitors of serine or aspartic proteases did not affect the secretion of P-LAP, while EDTA and 1,10-phenanthroline inhibited it. In addition, we transfected P-LAP expression vectors that have point mutations of the cleavage site or deletion of the juxtamembrane stalk. Point mutations of the cleavage site resulted in significantly lower secretion of P-LAP. On the contrary, the distance to cleavage site showed no relation to P-LAP secretion. These results suggest that P-LAP secretase has a metalloprotease activity which depends on the amino acid sequence of the cleavage site.

Number:  638
UID:  11493036
Founded words:  ['activation', 'associated', 'mediated']
Abstract:  Presenilin (PS) proteins facilitate endoproteolysis of selected type I transmembrane proteins such as the Alzheimer's disease (AD) associated beta-Amyloid precursor protein (beta APP) and Notch. beta APP is cleaved within its transmembrane domain by an aspartyl protease activity termed gamma-secretase, which may be identical with PS1 and PS2. Notch also undergoes a PS-dependent intramembraneous proteolysis. A similar gamma-secretase-like cleavage may also occur with IRE1 and ATF6, two signaling molecules of the unfolded protein response (UPR) that may require PSs for their activation. Here, we have analyzed whether ATF6 cleavage requires a PS-dependent gamma-secretase activity and whether inhibition of gamma-secretase activity would affect the UPR. Endoproteolysis of ATF6 was observed in the presence of the highly potent gamma-secretase inhibitor L-685,458. ATF6 processing also occurred in the presence of functionally inactive dominant negative mutants of PS1 (PS1 D385N) and PS2 (PS2 D366A) that do not support endoproteolysis of beta APP and Notch. Our results therefore demonstrate that ATF6 is not a substrate for PS mediated gamma-secretase-like endoproteolysis. This finding indicates that gamma-secretase inhibitors, which are currently developed as therapeutic agents to lower the A beta burden in brains of AD patients, do not interfere with the UPR response.

Number:  639
UID:  11477090
Founded words:  ['regulated']
Abstract:  We showed previously that PrPc undergoes constitutive and phorbol ester-regulated cleavage inside the 106-126 toxic domain of the protein, leading to the production of a fragment referred to as N1. Here we show by a pharmacological approach that o-phenanthroline, a general zinc-metalloprotease inhibitors, as well as BB3103 and TAPI, the inhibitors of metalloenzymes ADAM10 (A disintegrin and metalloprotease); and TACE, tumor necrosis factor alpha-converting enzyme; ADAM17), respectively, drastically reduce N1 formation. We set up stable human embryonic kidney 293 transfectants overexpressing human ADAM10 and TACE, and we demonstrate that ADAM10 contributes to constitutive N1 production whereas TACE mainly participates in regulated N1 formation. Furthermore, constitutive N1 secretion is drastically reduced in fibroblasts deficient for ADAM10 whereas phorbol 12,13-dibutyrate-regulated N1 production is fully abolished in TACE-deficient cells. Altogether, our data demonstrate for the first time that disintegrins could participate in the catabolism of glycosyl phosphoinositide-anchored proteins such as PrPc. Second, our study identifies ADAM10 and ADAM17 as the protease candidates responsible for normal cleavage of PrPc. Therefore, these disintegrins could be seen as putative cellular targets of a therapeutic strategy aimed at increasing normal PrPc breakdown and thereby depleting cells of the putative 106-126 "toxic" domain of PrPc.

Number:  640
UID:  11465706
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activation']
Abstract:  Notch family proteins are transmembrane receptors that control cell fate and proliferation. Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is characterized by activation and abnormal proliferation/differentiation of synoviocytes. We examined the expression of Notch-1 and its role in the activation of RA synoviocytes.

Number:  641
UID:  11463349
Founded words:  ['mediators', 'mediate', 'mediated', 'mediated', 'mediate']
Abstract:  The amyloid precursor protein (APP) of Alzheimer's disease is a transmembrane protein that is cleaved within its extracellular domain, liberating a soluble N-terminal fragment (sAPP alpha). Putative mediators of this process include three members of the ADAM (a disintegrin and metalloprotease) family, ADAM9, ADAM10 and ADAM17/TACE (tumour necrosis factor-alpha converting enzyme). Tumour necrosis factor-alpha protease inhibitor (TAPI-1), an inhibitor of ADAMs, reduced constitutive and muscarinic receptor-stimulated sAPP alpha release in HEK-293 cells stably expressing M3 muscarinic receptors. However, the former was less sensitive to TAPI-1 (IC(50)=8.09 microM) than the latter (IC(50)=3.61 microM), suggesting that these processes may be mediated by different metalloproteases. Constitutive sAPP alpha release was increased several-fold in cells transiently transfected with TACE, and this increase was proportional to TACE expression. In contrast, muscarinic-receptor-activated sAPP alpha release was not altered in TACE transfectants. TACE-dependent constitutive release of co-transfected APP(695) was inhibited by TAPI-1 with an IC(50) of 0.92 microm, a value significantly lower than the IC(50)s for inhibition of either constitutive or receptor-regulated sAPP alpha shedding mediated by endogenous secretases. The results indicate that TACE is capable of catalysing constitutive alpha-secretory cleavage of APP, but it is likely that additional members of the ADAM family mediate endogenous constitutive and receptor-coupled release of sAPP alpha in HEK-293 cells.

Number:  642
UID:  11459941
Founded words:  ['activated']
Abstract:  Mouse Notch1, which plays an important role in cell fate determination in development, is proteolytically processed within its transmembrane domain by unidentified gamma-secretase-like activity that depends on presenilin. To study this proteolytic event, we established a cell-free Notch cleavage assay system using the membrane fraction of fibroblast transfectants of various Notch constructs with deletion of the extracellular portion (Notch DeltaE). The cytoplasmic portion of Notch1 DeltaE was released from the membrane upon incubation at 37 degrees C, which was inhibited by the specific gamma-secretase inhibitor, MW167, or by overexpression of dominant negative presenilin1. Likewise, other members of mouse Notch family were proteolytically cleaved in a presenilin-dependent, MW167-sensitive manner in vivo as well as in the cell-free Notch DeltaE cleavage assay system. All four members of the mouse Notch family migrated to the nucleus and activated the transcription from the promoter carrying the RBP-J consensus sequences after they were released from the membrane. These results demonstrate the conserved biochemical mechanism of signal transduction among mammalian Notch family members.

Number:  643
UID:  11441186
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'complex', 'function', 'function', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Amyloid-beta precursor protein (APP), a widely expressed cell-surface protein, is cleaved in the transmembrane region by gamma-secretase. gamma-Cleavage of APP produces the extracellular amyloid beta-peptide of Alzheimer's disease and releases an intracellular tail fragment of unknown physiological function. We now demonstrate that the cytoplasmic tail of APP forms a multimeric complex with the nuclear adaptor protein Fe65 and the histone acetyltransferase Tip60. This complex potently stimulates transcription via heterologous Gal4- or LexA-DNA binding domains, suggesting that release of the cytoplasmic tail of APP by gamma-cleavage may function in gene expression.

Number:  644
UID:  11416218
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex', 'regulate', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  A major therapeutic target in the search for a cure to the devastating Alzheimer's disease is gamma-secretase. This activity resides in a multiprotein enzyme complex responsible for the generation of Abeta42 peptides, precipitates of which are thought to cause the disease. Gamma-secretase is also a critical component of the Notch signal transduction pathway; Notch signals regulate development and differentiation of adult self-renewing cells. This has led to the hypothesis that therapeutic inhibition of gamma-secretase may interfere with Notch-related processes in adults, most alarmingly in hematopoiesis. Here, we show that application of gamma-secretase inhibitors to fetal thymus organ cultures interferes with T cell development in a manner consistent with loss or reduction of Notch1 function. Progression from an immature CD4-/CD8- state to an intermediate CD4+/CD8+ double-positive state was repressed. Furthermore, treatment beginning later at the double-positive stage specifically inhibited CD8+ single-positive maturation but did not affect CD4+ single-positive cells. These results demonstrate that pharmacological gamma-secretase inhibition recapitulates Notch1 loss in a vertebrate tissue and present a system in which rapid evaluation of gamma-secretase-targeted pharmaceuticals for their ability to inhibit Notch activity can be performed in a relevant context.

Number:  645
UID:  11408475
Founded words:  ['activated']
Abstract:  Proteolytic processing of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) by beta- and gamma-secretases results in the production of a highly amyloidogenic Abeta peptide, which deposits in the brains of Alzheimer's disease patients. Similar gamma-secretase processing occurs in another transmembrane protein, Notch1, releasing a potent signaling molecule, the Notch C-terminal domain. It has been shown that both events are dependent on a presenilin-dependent protease. We now test the hypothesis that activated Notch1 and APP are competitive substrates for the same proteolytic activity in neurons. Treatment of neurons with the native Notch ligand, Delta, induces endogenous Notch1 intramembraneous cleavage and diminishes Abeta production in a dose-dependent manner. Complementary experiments showed that the converse was also true. Overexpressing human APP (APP(695Sw)) in neurons leads to a decrease in endogenous Notch1 signal transduction, as assessed by a CBF1 luciferase transcription assay, by Notch C-terminal domain nuclear translocation in vitro and by analysis of Notch C-terminal domain generation and Notch1 staining in vivo. In summary, two complementary approaches suggest that APP and Notch1 are physiologically relevant competitive substrates for gamma-secretase activity.

Number:  646
UID:  11306583
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'bind', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'bind', 'complex', 'complexes', 'complex']
Abstract:  Inhibition of beta-site amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzyme by a statine-based inhibitor has been studied using steady state and stopped-flow methods. A slow onset rate of inhibition has been observed under steady state conditions, and a K(i) of 22 nm has been derived using progress curves analysis. Simulation of stopped-flow protein fluorescence transients provided an estimate of the K(d) for initial inhibitor binding of 660 nm. A two-step inhibition mechanism is proposed, wherein slower "tightening up" of the initial encounter complex occurs. Two hypotheses have been proposed in the literature to address the nature of the slow step in the inhibition of aspartic proteases by peptidomimetic inhibitors: a conformational change related to the "flap" movement and displacement of a catalytic water. We compared substrate and inhibitor binding rates under pre-steady-state conditions. Both ligands are likely to cause flap movement, whereas no catalytic water replacement occurs during substrate binding. Our results suggest that both ligands bind to the enzyme at a rate significantly lower than the diffusion limit, but there are additional rate limitations involved in inhibitor binding, resulting in a k(on) of 3.5 x 10(4) m(-)1 s(-)1 for the inhibitor compared with 3.5 x 10(5) m(-)1 s(-)1 for the substrate. Even though specific intermediate formation steps might be different in the productive inhibitor and substrate binding to beta-site amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzyme, a similar final optimized conformation is achieved in both cases, as judged by the comparable free energy changes (DeltaDeltaG of 2.01 versus 1.97 kcal/mol) going from the initial to the final enzyme-inhibitor or enzyme-substrate complexes.

Number:  647
UID:  11278841
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex', 'regulated']
Abstract:  beta-Secretase (BACE) is a transmembrane aspartyl protease, which generates the N terminus of Alzheimer's disease amyloid beta-peptide. Here, we report that BACE can be phosphorylated within its cytoplasmic domain at serine residue 498 by casein kinase 1. Phosphorylation exclusively occurs after full maturation of BACE by propeptide cleavage and complex N-glycosylation. Phosphorylation/dephosphorylation affects the subcellular localization of BACE. BACE wild type and an S498D mutant that mimics phosphorylated BACE are predominantly located within juxtanuclear Golgi compartments and endosomes, whereas nonphosphorylatable BACE S498A accumulates in peripheral EEA1-positive endosomes. Antibody uptake assays revealed that reinternalization of BACE from the cell surface is independent of its phosphorylation state. After reinternalization, BACE wild type as well as BACE S498D are efficiently retrieved from early endosomal compartments and further targeted to later endosomal compartments and/or the trans-Golgi network. In contrast, nonphosphorylatable BACE S498A is retained within early endosomes. Our results therefore demonstrate regulated trafficking of BACE within the secretory and endocytic pathway.

Number:  648
UID:  11238737
Founded words:  ['regulated', 'regulated', 'regulated', 'regulated']
Abstract:  The beta-amyloid precursor protein (betaAPP) undergoes a physiological cleavage triggered by one or several proteolytic activities referred to as alpha-secretases, leading to the secretion of sAPPalpha. Several lines of evidence indicate that the alpha-secretase cleavage is a highly regulated process. Thus, besides constitutive production of sAPPalpha, several studies have reported on protein kinase C-regulated sAPPalpha secretion. Studies aimed at identifying alpha-secretase(s) candidates suggest the involvement of enzymes belonging to the pro-hormone convertases and disintegrin families. The delineation of respective contributions of proteolytic activities in constitutive and regulated sAPPalpha secretion is rendered difficult by the fact that the overall regulated response always includes the basal constitutive counterpart that cannot be selectively abolished. Here we report on the fact that the furin-deficient LoVo cells are devoid of regulated PKC-dependent sAPPalpha secretion and therefore represent an interesting model to study exclusively the constitutive sAPPalpha secretion. We show here, by a pharmacological approach using selective inhibitors, that pro-hormone convertases and proteases of the ADAM (disintegrin metalloproteases) family participate in the production/secretion of sAPPalphas in LoVo cells. Transfection analysis allowed us to further establish that the pro-hormone convertase 7 and ADAM10 but not ADAM17 (TACE, tumour necrosis factor alpha-converting enzyme) likely contribute to constitutive sAPPalpha secretion by LoVo cells.

Number:  649
UID:  11223916
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interacts', 'interaction', 'interacts']
Abstract:  The expression and secretion of amyloid precursor protein (beta APP) is increased in rat cerebral cortices that have been denervated by subcortical lesions of the nucleus basalis of Meynert. The physiological role of the secreted beta APP in response to this injury has not been established. We have previously shown that secreted beta APP produced by alpha-secretase activity (sAPP(alpha)) potentiates the neuritogenic activity of nerve growth factor (NGF) in vitro on naive PC12 cells. In this investigation, we have further characterized the neurotrophic interaction of NGF and sAPP(alpha) using differentiated PC12 cells and rat primary cortical neurons. NGF required the expression of beta APP to maintain a neuronal phenotype. Reduction of endogenous beta APP expression by introduction of antisense oligonucleotides in the presence of NGF resulted in loss of neurites from differentiated PC12 cells but no apparent cell death. Addition of exogenous sAPP(alpha) (60--200 pM) potentiated the protective activity of NGF in serum-deprived differentiated PC12 cells as determined by retention of neurites and cell viability. In addition, exogenous sAPP(alpha) increased neuron viability in both short-term (3 days) cortical neuron cultures grown in the absence of serum and in long-term (9 days) cultures grown with serum. Disruption of the insulin signaling pathway by reduction of IRS-1 expression inhibited the ability of sAPP(alpha) to potentiate neurotrophic activity. These observations suggest that sAPP(alpha) acts as an injury-induced neurotrophic factor that interacts with NGF to enhance neuronal viability using the insulin signaling pathway.

Number:  650
UID:  11193156
Founded words:  ['regulate']
Abstract:  gamma-Secretase catalyzes the cleavage at the carboxyl terminus of A beta to release it from the APP. While gamma-secretase is a major therapeutic drug target for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease (AD), it appears to be an unusual proteolytic activity, and, to date, no protease responsible for this activity has been identified. Based on studies of APP transmembrane domain (TMD) mutants, it is apparent that there are multiple pharmacologically distinct gamma-secretase activities that are spatially restricted and that presenilins (PS) regulate cleavage by gamma-secretases in a protease independent fashion. Based on these studies, we propose a multiprotease model for gamma-secretase activity and predict that the gamma-secretases are likely to be closely related proteases.

Number:  651
UID:  11193153
Founded words:  ['activated', 'regulated']
Abstract:  Disintegrin metalloproteases from different organisms form the ADAM (a disintegrin and metalloprotease) family. All members display a common domain organization and possess four potential functions: proteolysis, cell adhesion, cell fusion, and cell signaling. Members of the ADAM family are responsible for the proteolytic cleavage of transmembrane proteins and release of their extracellular domain. The proteolytic process is referred to as ectodomain shedding, which is activated by phorbol esters and inhibited by hydroxamic acid-based inhibitors. We have shown that the disintegrin metalloprotease ADAM 10 has both constitutive and regulated alpha-secretase activity. Expression of a dominant negative mutant of ADAM 10 in HEK cells decreases the secretion of APPs alpha. In order to investigate the influence of distinct protein domains of ADAM 10 on alpha-secretase activity, several deletion mutants of ADAM 10 were constructed. Our findings demonstrate that the deletion of the disintegrin domain results in a mutant ADAM 10 with remaining alpha-secretase activity, whereas the deletion of the prodomain destroys the proteolytic activity of ADAM 10.

Number:  652
UID:  11083918
Founded words:  ['interactions', 'interact', 'interact', 'interactions', 'interact', 'interact', 'binding', 'binding', 'mediate', 'mediate', 'complexes', 'regulation', 'regulation']
Abstract:  X11 alpha and X11 beta are two neuronal adaptor proteins that interact with the Alzheimer's disease amyloid precursor protein (APP). X11 alpha and X11 beta stabilise APP and inhibit production of proteolytic APP fragments including the A beta peptide that is deposited in the brains of Alzheimer's disease patients. The mechanisms by which X11 alpha and X11 beta modulate APP processing are not clear but one possibility is that they influence the activity of the secretases that cleave APP to give rise to A beta. Presenilin-1 is required for gamma-secretase activity and here we demonstrate that both X11 alpha and X11 beta interact with presenilin-1. X11/presenilin-1 binding is via two X11 PDZ domains and sequences within the carboxy-terminus of presenilin-1. We also demonstrate that both X11 alpha and X11 beta mediate the formation of complexes between APP and presenilin-1. These results suggest that the X11 regulation of APP processing is controlled, at least in part, via their interactions with APP and presenilin-1.

Number:  653
UID:  11015226
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activation', 'activation', 'activation', 'activation', 'activation', 'activated', 'activated', 'activating', 'regulatory']
Abstract:  Memapsin 2 (beta-secretase), a membrane-anchored aspartic protease, is involved in the cleavage of beta-amyloid precursor protein to form beta-amyloid peptide. The primary structure of memapsin 2 suggests that it is synthesized in vivo as pro-memapsin 2 and converted to memapsin 2 by an activating protease [Lin et al. (2000) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 97, 1456-1460]. To simulate this activation mechanism and to produce stable mature memapsin 2 for kinetic/specificity studies, we have investigated the activation of recombinant pro-memapsin 2 by several proteases with trypsin-like specificity. Clostripain, kallikrein, and trypsin increased the activity of pro-memapsin 2. Clostripain activation was accompanied by the cleavage of the pro region to form mainly two activation products, Leu(30p)- and Gly(45p)-memapsin 2. Another activation product, Leu(28p)-memapsin 2, was also purified. Kinetics of the activated memapsin 2 were compared with pro-memapsin 2 using two new fluorogenic substrates, Arg-Glu(5-[(2-aminoethyl)amino]naphthalene-1-sulfonic acid (EDANS))-Glu-Val-Asn-Leu-Asp-Ala-Glu-Phe-Lys(4-(4-dimethylaminophe nyl azo)benzoic acid (DABCYL))-Arg and (7-methoxycoumarin-4-yl)acetyl (MCA))-Ser-Glu-Val-Asn-Leu-Asp-Ala-Glu-Phe-Lys(2,4-dinitrophenyl (DNP)). These results establish that the activity of pro-memapsin 2 stems from a part-time and reversible uncovering of its active site by its pro region. Proteolytic removal of part of the pro-peptide at Leu(28p) or Gly(45p), which diminishes the affinity of the shortened pro-peptide to the active site, results in activated memapsin 2. These results also suggest that Glu(33p)-memapsin 2 observed in the cells expressing this enzyme [Vassar et al. (1999) Science 286, 735-741; Yan et al. (1999) Nature 402, 533-537] is an active intermediate of in vivo activation, or that the peptide Glu(33p)-Arg(44p) may serve a regulatory role.

Number:  654
UID:  10993067
Founded words:  ['binds', 'complex', 'complexes', 'complex']
Abstract:  Nicastrin, a transmembrane glycoprotein, forms high molecular weight complexes with presenilin 1 and presenilin 2. Suppression of nicastrin expression in Caenorhabditis elegans embryos induces a subset of notch/glp-1 phenotypes similar to those induced by simultaneous null mutations in both presenilin homologues of C. elegans (sel-12 and hop-1). Nicastrin also binds carboxy-terminal derivatives of beta-amyloid precursor protein (betaAPP), and modulates the production of the amyloid beta-peptide (A beta) from these derivatives. Missense mutations in a conserved hydrophilic domain of nicastrin increase A beta42 and A beta40 peptide secretion. Deletions in this domain inhibit A beta production. Nicastrin and presenilins are therefore likely to be functional components of a multimeric complex necessary for the intramembranous proteolysis of proteins such as Notch/GLP-1 and betaAPP.

Number:  655
UID:  10922078
Founded words:  ['complexes', 'complexes', 'complexes', 'complexes']
Abstract:  An unusual intramembranous cleavage of the beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP) by gamma-secretase is the final step in the generation of amyloid beta-peptide (Abeta). Two conserved aspartates in transmembrane (TM) domains 6 and 7 of presenilin (PS) 1 are required for Abeta production by gamma-secretase. Here we report that the APP C-terminal fragments, C83 and C99, which are the direct substrates of gamma-secretase, can be coimmunoprecipitated with both PS1 and PS2. PS/C83 complexes were detected in cells expressing endogenous levels of PS. The complexes accumulate when gamma-secretase is inactivated either pharmacologically or by mutating the PS aspartates. PS1/C83 and PS1/C99 complexes were detected in Golgi-rich and trans-Golgi network-rich vesicle fractions. In contrast, complexes of PS1 with APP holoprotein, which is not the immediate substrate of gamma-secretase, occurred earlier in endoplasmic reticulum-rich vesicles. The major portion of intracellular Abeta at steady state was found in the same Golgi/trans-Golgi network-rich vesicles, and Abeta levels in these fractions were markedly reduced when either PS1 TM aspartate was mutated to alanine. Furthermore, de novo generation of Abeta in a cell-free microsomal reaction occurred specifically in these same vesicle fractions and was markedly inhibited by mutating either TM aspartate. Thus, PSs are complexed with the gamma-secretase substrates C83 and C99 in the subcellular locations where Abeta is generated, indicating that PSs are directly involved in the pathogenically critical intramembranous proteolysis of APP.

Number:  656
UID:  10913280
Founded words:  ['function', 'function']
Abstract:  Progressive cerebral amyloid beta-protein (A beta) deposition is believed to play a central role in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Elevated levels of A beta(42) peptide formation have been linked to early-onset familial AD-causing gene mutations in the amyloid beta-protein precursor (A beta PP) and the presenilins. Sequential cleavage of A beta PP by the beta- and gamma-secretases generates the N- and C-termini of the A beta peptide, making both the beta- and gamma-secretase enzymes potential therapeutic targets for AD. The identity of the A beta PP gamma-secretase and the mechanism by which the C-termini of A beta are formed remain uncertain, although it has been suggested that the presenilins themselves are novel intramembrane-cleaving gamma-secretases of the aspartyl protease class [Wolfe, M. S., Xia, W., Ostaszewski, B. L., Diehl, T. S., Kimberly, W. T., and Selkoe, D. J. (1999) Nature 398, 513-517]. In this study we report the identification of L-685,458 as a structurally novel inhibitor of A beta PP gamma-secretase activity, with a similar potency for inhibition of A beta(42) and A beta(40) peptides. This compound contains an hydroxyethylene dipeptide isostere which suggests that it could function as a transition state analogue mimic of an aspartyl protease. The preferred stereochemistry of the hydroxyethylene dipeptide isostere was found to be the opposite to that required for inhibition of the HIV-1 aspartyl protease, a factor which may contribute to the observed specificity of this compound. Specific and potent inhibitors of A beta PP gamma-secretase activity such as L-685,458 will enable important advances toward the identification and elucidation of the mechanism of action of this enigmatic protease.

Number:  657
UID:  10899933
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activated', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  It has been hypothesized that a presenilin 1 (PS1)-related enzymatic activity is responsible for proteolytic cleavage of the C-terminal intracellular protein of Notch1, in addition to its role in beta-amyloid protein (Abeta) formation from the amyloid precursor protein (APP). We developed an assay to monitor ligand-induced Notch1 proteolysis and nuclear translocation in individual cells : Treatment of full-length Notch1-enhanced green fluorescent protein-transfected Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells with a soluble preclustered form of the physiologic ligand Delta leads to rapid accumulation of the C terminus of Notch1 in the nucleus and to transcriptional activation of a C-promoter binding factor 1 (CBF1) reporter construct. Nuclear translocation was blocked by cotransfection with Notch's physiologic inhibitor Numb. Using this assay, we now confirm and extend the observation that PS1 is involved in Notch1 nuclear translocation and signaling in mammalian cells. We demonstrate that the D257A and the D385A PS1 mutations, which had been shown previously to block APP gamma-secretase activity, also prevent Notch1 cleavage and translocation to the nucleus but do not alter Notch1 trafficking to the cell surface. We also show that two APP gamma-secretase inhibitors block Notch1 nuclear translocation with an IC(50) similar to that reported for APP gamma-secretase. Notch1 signaling, assessed by measuring the activity of CBF1, a downstream transcription factor, was impaired but not abolished by the PS1 aspartate mutations or gamma-secretase inhibitors. Our results support the hypotheses that (a) PS1-dependent APP gamma-secretase-like enzymatic activity is critical for both APP and Notch processing and (b) the Notch1 signaling pathway remains partially activated even when Notch1 proteolytic processing and nuclear translocation are markedly inhibited. The latter is an important finding from the perspective of therapeutic treatment of Alzheimer's disease by targeting gamma-secretase processing of APP to reduce Abeta production.

Number:  658
UID:  10816583
Founded words:  ['regulators', 'regulating', 'regulate', 'regulate', 'regulating', 'regulates']
Abstract:  Presenilins (PSs) are polytopic membrane proteins that have been implicated as potential therapeutic targets in Alzheimer's disease because of their role in regulating the gamma-secretase cleavage that generates the amyloid beta protein (Abeta). It is not clear how PSs regulate gamma-secretase cleavage, but there is evidence that PSs could be either essential cofactors in the gamma-secretase cleavage, gamma-secretase themselves, or regulators of intracellular trafficking that indirectly influence gamma-secretase cleavage. Using presenilin 1 (PS1) mutants that inhibit Abeta production in conjunction with transmembrane domain mutants of the amyloid protein precursor that are cleaved by pharmacologically distinct gamma-secretases, we show that PS1 regulates multiple pharmacologically distinct gamma-secretase activities as well as inducible alpha-secretase activity. It is likely that PS1 acts indirectly to regulate these activities (as in a trafficking or chaperone role), because these data indicate that for PS1 to be gamma-secretase it must either have multiple active sites or exist in a variety of catalytically active forms that are altered to an equivalent extent by the mutations we have studied.

Number:  659
UID:  10801872
Founded words:  ['mediated', 'complex', 'complex']
Abstract:  Amyloid beta-peptide is generated by two sequential proteolytic cleavages mediated by beta-secretase (BACE) and gamma-secretase. BACE was recently identified as a membrane-associated aspartyl protease. We have now analyzed the maturation and pro-peptide cleavage of BACE. Pulse-chase experiments revealed that BACE is post-translationally modified during transport to the cell surface, which can be monitored by a significant increase in the molecular mass. The increase in molecular mass is caused by complex N-glycosylation. Treatment with tunicamycin and N-glycosidase F led to a BACE derivative with a molecular weight corresponding to an unmodified version. In contrast, the mature form of BACE was resistant to endoglycosidase H treatment. The cytoplasmic tail of BACE was required for efficient maturation and trafficking through the Golgi; a BACE variant lacking the cytoplasmic tail undergoes inefficient maturation. In contrast a soluble BACE variant that does not contain a membrane anchor matured more rapidly than full-length BACE. Pro-BACE was predominantly located within the endoplasmic reticulum. Pro-peptide cleavage occurred immediately before full maturation and trafficking through the Golgi.

Number:  660
UID:  10685504
Founded words:  ['function', 'function']
Abstract:  Many hypotheses have been developed to explain aging and age-related neurodegenerative disorders; one of the most compelling is the role of oxidative stress to induce changes in protease activity in brains of patients of Alzheimer's disease and prion disease. At the moment however, there is no clear answer how protein degradation may be achieved in the brain. We have observed that several metal compounds can degrade proteins in the presence of hydrogen peroxide, and elucidated the reaction scheme based on the new theoretical point for the reactivity of a metal-peroxide adduct with eta 1-coordination mode. In this article we would like to point out the importance of a copper(II)-peroxide adduct to promote neurodegenerative diseases such as prion disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis through its oxidative protease function.

Number:  661
UID:  10651647
Founded words:  ['regulated']
Abstract:  The deposition of amyloid-beta peptides (Abeta) in senile plaques (SPs) is a central pathological feature of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Since SPs are composed predominantly of Abeta1-42, which is more amyloidogenic in vitro, the enzymes involved in generating Abeta1-42 may be particularly important to the pathogenesis of AD. In contrast to Abeta1-40, which is generated in the trans-Golgi network and other cytoplasmic organelles, intracellular Abeta1-42 is produced in the endoplasmic reticulum/intermediate compartment (ER/IC), where it accumulates in a stable insoluble pool. Since this pool of insoluble Abeta1-42 may play a critical role in AD amyloidogenesis, we sought to determine how the production of intracellular Abeta is regulated. Surprisingly, the production of insoluble intracellular Abeta1-42 was increased by a putative gamma-secretase inhibitor as well as by an inhibitor of the proteasome. We further demonstrate that this increased generation of Abeta1-42 in the ER/IC is due to a reduction in the turnover of Abeta-containing APP C-terminal fragments. We conclude that the proteasome is a novel site for degradation of ER/IC-generated APP fragments. Proteasome inhibitors may augment the availability of APP C-terminal fragments for gamma-secretase cleavage and thereby increase production of Abeta1-42 in the ER/IC. Based on the organelle-specific differences in the generation of Abeta by gamma-secretase, we conclude that intracellular ER/IC-generated Abeta1-42 and secreted Abeta1-40 are produced by different gamma-secretases. Further, the fact that a putative gamma-secretase inhibitor had opposite effects on the production of secreted and intracellular Abeta may have important implications for AD drug design.

Number:  662
UID:  10593990
Founded words:  ['bind', 'binds', 'bind', 'complex', 'complex', 'function', 'function', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Presenilin-1 (PS1), a polytopic membrane protein primarily localized to the endoplasmic reticulum, is required for efficient proteolysis of both Notch and beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP) within their trans- membrane domains. The activity that cleaves APP (called gamma-secretase) has properties of an aspartyl protease, and mutation of either of the two aspartate residues located in adjacent transmembrane domains of PS1 inhibits gamma-secretase processing of APP. We show here that these aspartates are required for Notch processing, since mutation of these residues prevents PS1 from inducing the gamma-secretase-like proteolysis of a Notch1 derivative. Thus PS1 might function in Notch cleavage as an aspartyl protease or di-aspartyl protease cofactor. However, the ER localization of PS1 is inconsistent with that hypothesis, since Notch cleavage occurs near the cell surface. Using pulse-chase and biotinylation assays, we provide evidence that PS1 binds Notch in the ER/Golgi and is then co-transported to the plasma membrane as a complex. PS1 aspartate mutants were indistinguishable from wild-type PS1 in their ability to bind Notch or traffic with it to the cell surface, and did not alter the secretion of Notch. Thus, PS1 appears to function specifically in Notch proteolysis near the plasma membrane as an aspartyl protease or cofactor.

Number:  663
UID:  10525535
Founded words:  ['function', 'function']
Abstract:  Mutations of presenilin 1 (PS1) causing Alzheimer's disease selectively increase the secretion of the amyloidogenic betaA4(1-42), whereas knocking out the gene results in decreased production of both betaA4(1-40) and (1-42) amyloid peptides (De Strooper et al. 1998). Therefore, PS1 function is closely linked to the gamma-secretase processing of the amyloid precursor protein (APP). Given the ongoing controversy on the subcellular localization of PS1, it remains unclear at what level of the secretory and endocytic pathways PS1 exerts its activity on APP and on the APP carboxy-terminal fragments that are the direct substrates for gamma-secretase. Therefore, we have reinvestigated the subcellular localization of endogenously expressed PS1 in neurons in vitro and in vivo using confocal microscopy and fine-tuned subcellular fractionation. We show that uncleaved PS1 holoprotein is recovered in the nuclear envelope fraction, whereas the cleaved PS fragments are found mainly in post-ER membranes including the intermediate compartment (IC). PS1 is concentrated in discrete sec23p- and p58/ERGIC-53-positive patches, suggesting its localization in subdomains involved in ER export. PS1 is not found to significant amounts beyond the cis-Golgi. Surprisingly, we found that APP carboxy-terminal fragments also coenrich in the pre-Golgi membrane fractions, consistent with the idea that these fragments are the real substrates for gamma-secretase. Functional evidence that PS1 exerts its effects on gamma-secretase processing of APP in the ER/IC was obtained using a series of APP trafficking mutants. These mutants were investigated in hippocampal neurons derived from transgenic mice expressing PS1wt or PS1 containing clinical mutations (PS1(M146L) and PS1(L286V)) at physiologically relevant levels. We demonstrate that the APP-London and PS1 mutations have additive effects on the increased secretion of betaA4(1-42) relative to betaA4(1-40), indicating that both mutations operate independently. Overall, our data clearly establish that PS1 controls gamma(42)-secretase activity in pre-Golgi compartments. We discuss models that reconcile this conclusion with the effects of PS1 deficiency on the generation of betaA4(1-40) peptide in the late biosynthetic and endocytic pathways.

Number:  664
UID:  10510302
Founded words:  ['activated']
Abstract:  MDC9, also known as meltrin gamma, is a membrane-anchored metalloprotease. MDC9 contains several distinct protein domains: a signal sequence followed by a prodomain and a domain showing sequence similarity to snake venom metalloproteases, a disintegrin-like domain, a cysteine-rich region, an epidermal-growth-factor-like repeat, a transmembrane domain and a cytoplasmic domain. Here we demonstrate that MDC9 expressed in COS cells is cleaved between the prodomain and the metalloprotease domain. Further, when MDC9 was co-expressed in COS cells with amyloid precursor protein (APP695) and treated with phorbol ester, APP695 was digested exclusively at the alpha-secretory site in MDC9-expressing cells. When an artificial alpha-secretory site mutant was also co-expressed with MDC9 and treated with phorbol ester, APP secreted by alpha-secretase was not increased in conditional medium. Inhibition of MDC9 by a hydroxamate-based metalloprotease inhibitor, SI-27, enhanced beta-secretase cleavage. These results suggest that MDC9 has an alpha-secretase-like activity and is activated by phorbol ester.

Number:  665
UID:  10482351
Founded words:  ['mediating', 'mediated']
Abstract:  We investigated the ability of the antidementia agents, nicergoline, aniracetam and hydergine to stimulate PKC mediated alpha-secretase amyloid precursor protein (APP) processing in cultured human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells. Western immunoblotting of cell conditioned media using the Mabs 22C11 and 6E10 revealed the presence of 2 bands with molecular mass of 90 and 120 kDa, corresponding to possible alternatively glycosylated forms of secreted APP (APPs). Short-term (30 min and 2 h) treatment of cells with nicergoline gave an increased intensity of both bands, compared to non-treated cells. Maximal nicergoline effects, of the order of 150-200% over basal APPs release, were seen at concentrations between 1 and 10 microM. Under the same condition, 1 microM PdBu, used as a positive control, gave 500-1000% increases of basal APPs release. In contrast, aniracetam and hydergine, did not show any effect on APPs secretion. 2 h treatment with nicergoline had no effect on cellular full-length APP levels, as determined by immunoblotting of cell extracts with 22C11 and CT15 antibodies. Immunoblotting with PKC isoform specific antibodies of soluble and membrane fractions prepared from 2 h treated cells, showed that nicergoline (50 microM) and PdBu (1 microM) both induced translocation of PKC alpha, gamma and epsilon, but not PKC beta. The involvement of PKC in mediating nicergoline stimulated APPs release was also studied using specific inhibitors. 1 microM calphostin C, a broad range PKC inhibitor, significantly reduced both PdBu (1 microM) and nicergoline (10 microM) induced APPs release. In contrast, Go6976 (1 microM), a selective PKC alpha and beta1 inhibitor, as well as the cAMP-dependent protein kinase inhibitor, H89 (1 microM) were without effect. These results indicate that nicergoline can modulate alpha-secretase APP processing by a PKC dependent mechanism that is likely to involve the gamma and epsilon isoforms of this enzyme.

Number:  666
UID:  10421573
Founded words:  ['function', 'function']
Abstract:  Presenilin-1 (PS1) is a transmembrane protein that is located in the endoplasmic reticulum and the cis Golgi apparatus. Missense mutations of PS1 that modify gamma-secretase function, leading to a pathologic processing of amyloid precursor protein, are an important cause of familial Alzheimer's disease. Physiologically, the presenilins are involved in the Notch and Wnt-beta-catenin signaling pathways.

Number:  667
UID:  10421573
Founded words:  ['associated']
Abstract:  PS1-deficient mice develop a cortical dysplasia resembling human type 2 lissencephaly, with leptomeningeal fibrosis and migration of cortical-plate neurons beyond their normal position into the marginal zone and subarachnoid space. This disorder of neuronal migration is associated with the disappearance of the majority of the cells of the marginal zone, notably most of the Cajal-Retzius pioneer neurons, between embryonic days E14 and E18, and is preceded and accompanied by disorganization of Notch-1 immunoreactivity on the neuronal cell membranes. The marginal zone also becomes depleted of the extracellular matrix protein reelin and chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans. At that stage PS1 is transiently expressed in leptomeningeal fibroblasts, which are mandatory for the trophic support of Cajal-Retzius neurons.

Number:  668
UID:  10421573
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction']
Abstract:  In agreement with models in which neuronal migration disorders have been linked to a defect in Cajal-Retzius cells, the loss of most of these cells in PS1-deficient mice leads to cortical dysplasia. Because PS1 is normally expressed in the leptomeninges, and these become fibrotic in the PS1-knockout mice, we favor the hypothesis that the loss of Cajal-Retzius cells is caused by a defective trophic interaction with leptomeningeal cells, possibly involving disruption of Notch signaling.

Number:  669
UID:  10349856
Founded words:  ['activation', 'complex', 'complex', 'regulating', 'regulating', 'regulates']
Abstract:  The metabolic fate of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) is one of the key factors in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). A complex cellular mechanism regulates the rate at which the precursor is cleaved by alpha-secretase and released as soluble protein in the extracellular space. We show here that alpha-secretase constitutes the common final effector of several independent means of stimulation of soluble APP (sAPP) release. The release of sAPP by alpha-secretase resembles that of several other membrane-bound proteins with soluble counterparts, a process that is sensitive to matrix metalloprotease inhibitors. The hydroxamic acid-based compound KD-IX-73-4 inhibits phorbol ester-mediated sAPP release from COS cells with an IC50 of 8 microM, consistent with previous data for the same compound against leukocyte L-selectin shedding. Beyond direct protein kinase C (PKC) activation we show that KD-IX-73-4 inhibits also receptor-mediated sAPP release induced by carbachol in SH-SY5Y cells and by bradykinin in human skin fibroblasts, with the latter being a PKC-independent mechanism. Altogether these data suggest that all pharmacological means of stimulating sAPP release converge to a hydroxamic acid-based inhibitor-sensitive proteolytic enzyme. Moreover, because KD-IX-73-4 was effective in the inhibition of stimulated but not constitutive sAPP release, these data suggest the existence of different enzymes regulating the two metabolic pathways leading to sAPP secretion.

Number:  670
UID:  10097139
Founded words:  ['activated', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  Amyloid beta peptide (Abeta), the principal proteinaceous component of amyloid plaques in brains of Alzheimer's disease patients, is derived by proteolytic cleavage of the amyloid precursor protein (APP). Proteolytic cleavage of APP by a putative alpha-secretase within the Abeta sequence precludes the formation of the amyloidogenic peptides and leads to the release of soluble APPsalpha into the medium. By overexpression of a disintegrin and metalloprotease (ADAM), classified as ADAM 10, in HEK 293 cells, basal and protein kinase C-stimulated alpha-secretase activity was increased severalfold. The proteolytically activated form of ADAM 10 was localized by cell surface biotinylation in the plasma membrane, but the majority of the proenzyme was found in the Golgi. These results support the view that APP is cleaved both at the cell surface and along the secretory pathway. Endogenous alpha-secretase activity was inhibited by a dominant negative form of ADAM 10 with a point mutation in the zinc binding site. Studies with purified ADAM 10 and Abeta fragments confirm the correct alpha-secretase cleavage site and demonstrate a dependence on the substrate's conformation. Our results provide evidence that ADAM 10 has alpha-secretase activity and many properties expected for the proteolytic processing of APP. Increases of its expression and activity might be beneficial for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease.

Number:  671
UID:  10037494
Founded words:  ['complex', 'complex', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Metalloprotease MP100 was originally isolated as a beta-secretase candidate from human brain using a beta-amyloid precursor protein (beta-APP)-derived p-nitroanilide (pNA) peptide substrate. Peptide sequences from purified MP100 were now found to resemble sequences reported for a puromycin-sensitive aminopeptidase (PSA) highly enriched in brain, and cDNA cloning revealed nearly complete homology of MP100 to PSA, with only a single bp difference resulting in an amino acid change at position 184. Another MP100 cDNA encoded a protein with a 36-amino acid deletion (positions 180-217) and a two-amino acid insertion after Val533. Purified recombinant human MP100 cleaved the original pNA substrate as well as a free beta-site-spanning amyloid beta (A beta) peptide (A beta(-10/+10)), generating A beta(1-10). The latter substrate, however, remained uncleaved, if N- and C-terminally blocked, and also purified beta-APP was not cleaved. Double immunoimaging revealed partial, patchy, colocalization of beta-APP and MP100 in doubly transfected human embryonic kidney cells (HEK cells) and in normal neuroblastoma cells, and both proteins could be coimmunoprecipitated from rat brain extracts, suggesting their close vicinity in vivo. Coexpression of MP100 and beta-APP695, however, did not boost A beta levels in HEK cells, although active enzyme was produced. Thus, MP100 does not exert true beta-secretase-like function in cells, although it may well act as a secondary exoprotease in a complex beta-APP/A beta metabolism.

Number:  672
UID:  9832310
Founded words:  ['associated']
Abstract:  As the amyloidogenic processing of beta-amyloid precursor protein (betaAPP) proceeds under conditions of oxidative stress, the methionine-596 residue at the beta-secretase cleavage point is likely in an oxidized state. In the present work, possible consequences of the oxidation of Met-596 for the generation of the N-terminus of amyloid beta protein were modeled using synthetic peptide substrates, matching 587-606 sequence fragment of betaAPP and containing either intact methionine or methionine sulfoxide. Patterns and rates for the cleavage of these substrates by purified mast cell chymase, cathepsin G, cathepsin D, matrix metalloproteinase-3 and neutrophil elastase, were compared. Only the three first proteases, all previously suggested as candidate beta-secretases, preferentially cleaved the "intact" substrate after Met-596. For chymase and cathepsin G, the specificity of this cleavage increased upon a shift from optimal alkaline pH to acidic pH, which is also more compatible with the plausible intracellular localization of amyloidogenic betaAPP processing. The substitution of methionine sulfoxide for methionine in the substrate slowed down the cleavage rate for all the enzymes tested, by a factor of 6-15. This was associated with shifts of cleavage preferences to points of minor importance for the "intact" peptide, suggesting a specific resistance of the peptide bond after MetSO-596 against proteolysis.

Number:  673
UID:  9811864
Founded words:  ['interacting', 'interacting', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  The importance of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) became apparent through the identification of distinct mutations in the APP gene, causing early onset familial AD with the accumulation of a 4-kDa peptide fragment (betaA4) in amyloid plaques and vascular deposits. However, the physiological role of APP is still unclear. In this work, Drosophila melanogaster is used as a model system to analyze the function of APP by expressing wild-type and various mutant forms of human APP in fly tissue culture cells as well as in transgenic fly lines. After expression of full-length APP forms, secretion of APP but not of betaA4 was observed in both systems. By using SPA4CT, a short APP form in which the signal peptide was fused directly to the betaA4 region, transmembrane domain, and cytoplasmic tail, we observed betaA4 release in flies and fly-tissue culture cells. Consequently, we showed a gamma-secretase activity in flies. Interestingly, transgenic flies expressing full-length forms of APP have a blistered-wing phenotype. As the wing is composed of interacting dorsal and ventral epithelial cell layers, this phenotype suggests that human APP expression interferes with cell adhesion/signaling pathways in Drosophila, independently of betaA4 generation.

Number:  674
UID:  9637259
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'regulatory']
Abstract:  The processing of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) and the sterol regulatory element binding protein show remarkable analogies. Following a first lumenal cleavage, both proteins undergo a cleavage within the transmembrane domain by enzymatic activities named gamma-secretase and S2P, respectively. We analyzed the processing of APP in the mutant Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cell line M19 which lacks the S2P gene encoding for a putative metalloprotease. In these cells, we were not able to detect any beta-amyloid production from endogenous or transiently overexpressed APP, although the transport of APP along the secretory pathway, its processing by alpha- and beta-secretase, as well as its secretion were normal. This strongly suggests that the gamma-secretase cleavage in M19 cells is severely impaired.

Number:  675
UID:  9624107
Founded words:  ['regulatory']
Abstract:  Amyloid peptides of 39-43 amino acids (Abeta) are the major constituents of amyloid plaques present in the brains of Alzheimer's (AD) patients. Proteolytic processing of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) by the yet unidentified beta- and gamma-secretases leads to the generation of the amyloidogenic Abeta peptides. Recent data suggest that all of the known mutations leading to early onset familial AD alter the processing of APP such that increased amounts of the 42-amino acid form of Abeta are generated by a gamma-secretase activity. Identification of the beta- and/or gamma-secretases is a major goal of current AD research, as they are prime targets for therapeutic intervention in AD. It has been suggested that the sterol regulatory element-binding protein site 2 protease (S2P) may be identical to the long sought gamma-secretase. We have directly tested this hypothesis using over-expression of the S2P cDNA in cells expressing APP and by characterizing APP processing in mutant Chinese hamster ovary cells that are deficient in S2P activity and expression. The data demonstrate that S2P does not play an essential role in the generation or secretion of Abeta peptides from cells, thus it is unlikely to be a gamma-secretase.

Number:  676
UID:  9553108
Founded words:  ['associated', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  Caveolae are plasma membrane invaginations where key signaling elements are concentrated. In this report, both biochemical and histochemical analyses demonstrate that the amyloid precursor protein (APP), a source of Abeta amyloid peptide, is enriched within caveolae. Caveolin-1, a principal component of caveolae, is physically associated with APP, and the cytoplasmic domain of APP directly participates in this binding. The characteristic C-terminal fragment that results from APP processing by alpha-secretase, an as yet unidentified enzyme that cleaves APP within the Abeta amyloid sequence, was also localized within these caveolae-enriched fractions. Further analysis by cell surface biotinylation revealed that this cleavage event occurs at the cell surface. Importantly, alpha-secretase processing was significantly promoted by recombinant overexpression of caveolin in intact cells, resulting in increased secretion of the soluble extracellular domain of APP. Conversely, caveolin depletion using antisense oligonucletotides prevented this cleavage event. Our current results indicate that caveolae and caveolins may play a pivotal role in the alpha-secretase-mediated proteolysis of APP in vivo.

Number:  677
UID:  9450754
Founded words:  ['regulation', 'regulation', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Point mutations in the presenilin-1 gene (PS1) are a major cause of familial Alzheimer's disease. They result in a selective increase in the production of the amyloidogenic peptide amyloid-beta(1-42) by proteolytic processing of the amyloid precursor protein (APP). Here we investigate whether PS1 is also involved in normal APP processing in neuronal cultures derived from PS1-deficient mouse embryos. Cleavage by alpha- and beta-secretase of the extracellular domain of APP was not affected by the absence of PS1, whereas cleavage by gamma-secretase of the transmembrane domain of APP was prevented, causing carboxyl-terminal fragments of APP to accumulate and a fivefold drop in the production of amyloid peptide. Pulse-chase experiments indicated that PS1 deficiency specifically decreased the turnover of the membrane-associated fragments of APP. As in the regulation of cholesterol metabolism by proteolysis of a membrane-bound transcription factor, PS1 appears to facilitate a proteolytic activity that cleaves the integral membrane domain of APP. Our results indicate that mutations in PS1 that manifest clinically cause a gain of function and that inhibition of PS1 activity is a potential target for anti-amyloidogenic therapy in Alzheimer's disease.

Number:  678
UID:  9355759
Founded words:  ['activation', 'activation', 'activation', 'activator', 'regulation', 'regulation']
Abstract:  The amyloid precursor protein (APP) of Alzheimer's disease is a transmembrane protein that is cleaved by an uncharacterized enzyme known as alpha-secretase within its extracellular/intraluminal domain after the activation of guanine nucleotide-binding protein-coupled receptors linked to phosphoinositide hydrolysis. The secretory process results in the release of large soluble derivatives of APP (APPs), and, when elicited by muscarinic receptor activation, exhibits both protein kinase C (PKC)-dependent and tyrosine phosphorylation-dependent components [Slack, Breu, Petryniak, Srivastava and Wurtman (1995) J. Biol. Chem. 270, 8337-8344]. In this report we examine the regulation of the release of APPs by epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptors, which possess intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity, and are coupled to a variety of effectors including phosphoinositide-specific phospholipase Cgamma. In A431 cells, EGF caused time-dependent and dose-dependent increases in the formation of inositol phosphates in cultures prelabelled with myo--3H-inositol, and in the release of APPs into the culture medium; the two responses exhibited similar time courses and EC50 values for EGF. Concomitant with these effects, there were concentration-dependent (3-300 ng/ml) increases in the phosphorylation of tyrosine residues in several proteins, including the EGF receptor itself. The specific PKC antagonist GF 109203X decreased the effect of EGF by approx. 35% at a concentration that abolished the stimulation of the release of APPs by the PKC activator PMA. Tyrphostin AG 1478, an inhibitor of EGF receptor tyrosine kinase, abolished the EGF-induced release of APPs. These results demonstrate that in A431 cells, activation of the EGF receptor stimulates alpha-secretase activity by a mechanism that is partly dependent on PKC activity.

Number:  679
UID:  9228557
Founded words:  ['regulated']
Abstract:  Diverse membrane proteins are solubilized by a specific proteolytic cleavage in the stalk sequence adjacent to the membrane anchor, with release of the extracellular domain. Examples are the amyloid precursor protein, membrane-bound growth factors and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE). The identities and characteristics of the responsible proteases remain elusive. We have studied this process in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells stably expressing wild-type ACE (WT-ACE) or juxtamembrane (stalk) deletion or chimaera mutants. Determination of the C termini (i.e. the cleavage sites) of released, soluble wild-type and mutant ACE by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry indicated that the membrane-protein-solubilizing protease (MPSP) in CHO cells is not constrained by a particular cleavage site motif or by a specific distance from the membrane, but instead may position itself with respect to the putative proximal, folded extracellular domain adjacent to the stalk. Nevertheless, kinetic analyses of release rates indicated that a minimum distance from the membrane must be preserved. Interestingly, soluble full-length (anchor-plus) WT-ACE incubated with fractions of, or intact, CHO cells was not cleaved. In all cases, release was stimulated by a media change or by the addition of phorbol ester, with rate enhancements of 5- and 50-fold, respectively, for WT-ACE. The phorbol ester effect was abolished by staurosporine, a protein kinase C (PKC) inhibitor. We propose that the CHO cell MPSP that solubilizes ACE: (1) only cleaves proteins embedded in a membrane; (2) requires an accessible stalk and cleaves at a minimum distance from both the membrane and proximal extracellular domain; (3) positions itself primarily with respect to the proximal extracellular domain and (4) is regulated in part by a PKC-dependent mechanism.

Number:  680
UID:  9121365
Founded words:  ['regulated']
Abstract:  Amyloid deposits in Alzheimer's disease are composed of amyloid beta-peptides (A beta) that are derived from the larger amyloid precursor protein (APP). Proteolytic APP processing is activity-dependent, and it can be regulated by muscarinic acetylcholine receptors. In particular, muscarinic m1 receptor subtypes increase cleavage within the A beta domain, followed by the release of the soluble APP ectodomain (APPs). In this study, we show that the m1-selective agonist talsaclidine concentration-dependently increased APPs release from both transfected human astrocytoma cell lines and rat brain slices. This increase was blocked by atropine. In contrast, the M2 antagonist BIBN 99 failed to increase APPs release, and decreased it at higher concentrations. These results show that talsaclidine can effectively modulate alpha-secretase processing of APP in human cell lines and in brain tissue. The data suggest that talsaclidine may be a useful candidate drug to modulate APP processing in Alzheimer's disease.

Number:  681
UID:  8933367
Founded words:  ['associated']
Abstract:  beta A4 secretion occurs upon processing of amyloid protein precursor (APP) by beta-secretase (N-terminus of beta A4) and gamma-secretase (C-terminus). To determine the sequence of these activities and the processing intermediate of beta A4, we expressed several truncated APP molecules in human HEK-293 cells. Immunofluorescence and biotinylation studies indicated that full-length APP or APP lacking the cytosolic domain both were located intracellularly, associated with the cell surface and secreted. APPs truncated after amino acid 40, 42, or 43 of beta A4 were not inserted into cell membranes, were found intracellularly but not on the cell surface, and were efficiently secreted into the culture medium. The secretion of APP truncated at amino acid 40 of beta A4 occurred without proteolytic processing. Neither beta A4 nor P3 (the product of the alpha-secretase) was secreted from any of the APP molecules truncated at the gamma-secretase sites. In sharp contrast to this, when the C-terminal 100 amino acids of APP were expressed (APP truncated at the N-terminus of beta A4), a robust beta A4 secretion was observed. Thus, the C-terminal fragment of APP produced by beta-secretase activity is likely to be the processing intermediate of beta A4.

Number:  682
UID:  8626795
Founded words:  ['interaction', 'interaction', 'function', 'function']
Abstract:  Amyloid precursor protein (APP) and cholesterol metabolism are genetically linked to Alzheimer's disease, the latter through apolipoprotein E, a lipid and cholesterol transport protein. We have examined the hypothesis that the processing of APP is disrupted by elevated cholesterol, which is known to modulate the activity of several transmembrane proteins. In the current study, cholesterol, solubilized by methyl- beta-cyclodextrin or ethanol, was added to the culture media of APP 751 stably transfected HEK 293 cells. Radiolabeled APP and APPsol (the soluble N-terminal derivative following alpha-secretase cleavage) were precipitated from lysates and conditioned media of stably transfected HEK 293 cells; the relative levels were determined by quantitative densitometry following separation by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. The data show that cholesterol, solubilized by methyl-beta-cyclodextrin, greatly reduced the levels of APPsol. Low doses of ethanol-solubilized cholesterol similarly caused a dramatic reduction of APPsol. By contrast, levels of APP holoprotein remained the same or increased. The large decrease seen in APPsol production was not due to nonspecific inhibition of secretion because several secreted proteins increased in level. Cholesterol, which impedes membrane fluidity, may lower APPsol production by impeding the interaction of the substrate with its protease(s). If APPsol were to function trophically, as suggested by other studies, the current conclusion suggests that changes in cellular cholesterol levels in Alzheimer's disease could contribute to neuronal degeneration by decreasing the production of APPsol.

Number:  683
UID:  8576122
Founded words:  ['mediates']
Abstract:  The Ras-related GTP-binding protein, Rab6, is localized in late Golgi compartments where it mediates intra-Golgi vesicular trafficking. Herein we report that coexpression of Alzheimer's beta-amyloid precursor protein (beta APP751) with a dominant-negative Rab6 mutant (Rab6N126I) in human embryonal kidney 293 cells causes an increase in secretion of the soluble amino-terminal exodomain (s-APP alpha) derived from non-amyloidogenic processing of beta-APP751 by alpha-secretase. The effect was specific to Rab6N126I, since the corresponding mutation in Rab8 (i.e. Rab8N121I), which has been implicated in protein transport to the plasma membrane, caused a modest reduction in s-APP alpha secretion. While Rab6N126I stimulated secretion of APP alpha, the accumulation of amyloid beta peptide (A beta) in the medium was either moderately reduced or unaffected. Similar differential effects of Rab6N126I on secretion of s-APP alpha versus A beta were observed in cell cultures that were overproducing A beta after transfection with a plasmid encoding Swedish variant of beta APP751. Moreover, assays of medium from the latter cultures revealed a marked increase in secretion of s-APP alpha relative to s-APP beta (the immediate product derived from cleavage of beta APP by beta-secretase). The results indicate that vesicular transport events controlled by Rab6 occur at or near a critical juncture in the trans-Golgi network where beta APP is sorted into either the constitutive alpha-secretase pathway or the amyloidogenic beta-secretase pathway.

Number:  684
UID:  8537184
Founded words:  ['mediated']
Abstract:  Lysosomal cathepsin B but not L degraded rAPP751 to yield C-terminal 19-25 kDa fragments containing beta A4, reinforcing the view that acidic proteases participate in endosomal-lysosomal processing to yield amyloidogenic fragments in situ. This mechanism is consistent with fragmentation of endogenous APPs within clathrin-coated vesicles (CVs) by vesicular hydrolases, with the appearance of C-terminal amyloidogenic fragments following incubation at pH 6.5. A neutral endopeptidase resembling NEP 24.11 (PS-NEP) purified from detergent extracts of human brain degraded rAPP751; however, breakdown was not blocked robustly by metal chelators or phosphoramidon, suggesting the presence of an alternative processing enzyme. Effects of other inhibitors showed that breakdown was mediated by serine-protease-like component(s). A phosphoramidon-insensitive metalloendopeptidase (PI-NEP) partially purified from rat brain P2 using detergents, and resembling NEP 24.15, showed no activity towards rAPP751. Peptides containing putative beta- or gamma-secretase sites were synthesized for purposes of examining their metabolism by the brain enzymes. Those containing beta-secretase sites were hydrolysed at one or more sites by the four enzymes, but only PI- and PS-NEP acted at the Met-Asp site of Ac-Val-Lys-Met-Asp-Ala-Glu-Phe-Arg.NH2. In the case of substrates containing the gamma-site, these two categories of enzymes were the only ones degrading N-Ac-Ile-Ala.NH2. These data imply that the brain metalloendopeptidases, while inactive towards intact precursors, may be involved in turnover of intermediates containing beta- or gamma-sites.

Number:  685
UID:  8163520
Founded words:  ['binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding', 'binding']
Abstract:  Abnormalities of zinc homeostasis occur in Alzheimer's disease (AD), a dementia characterized by the aggregation of A beta in the brain, and in Down syndrome, a condition characterized by premature AD. We studied the binding of Zn2+ to a synthetic peptide representing residues 1-40 (A beta 1-40), as well as other domains of A beta. Two classes of Zn2+ binding were identified by 65Zn2+ labeling: highly specific pH-dependent high affinity (K(a) = 107 nM) binding, and lower affinity (K(a) = 5.2 microM) binding. Gel filtration chromatography identified monomeric, dimeric, and polymeric A beta species. Zinc induced a marked loss of A beta solubility upon chromatographic analysis. This was attributed to precipitation onto the column glass, which contains aluminosilicate, and was confirmed by the observation of zinc-accelerated precipitation of A beta by kaolin, a hydrated aluminum silicate suspension. Zinc binding also increased A beta resistance to tryptic cleavage at the secretase site, indicating that a small (<3 microM) increase in brain Zn2+ concentration could significantly alter A beta metabolism. We propose that elevated brain interstitial zinc levels may increase A beta adhesiveness and interfere with A beta catabolism. Consequently, abnormalities of regional zinc concentrations in the brains of patients with AD or Down syndrome may contribute to A beta amyloidosis in these disorders.

Number:  686
UID:  8239271
Founded words:  ['function', 'function']
Abstract:  Amyloid beta protein (beta/A4 or A beta), the main proteinaceous component of the amyloid depositions of the Alzheimer's brain, derives from the proteolytic processing of the amyloid precursor protein (APP). Cleavage of the amyloid precursor by at least two distinct secretase activities produces soluble secreted APP. The major secretase cleavage (site I) takes place between A beta 16 and 17, while the minor cleavage (site II) takes place after A beta Lys 28 and may produce potentially amyloidogenic secreted APP. Full-length cellular APP is cleaved by secretase intracellularly in the Trans-Golgi Network (TGN) or in post-Golgi vesicles. The resultant soluble APP is transported to the plasma membrane and exocytosed. The biological activity of the APP is still not completely understood, although it seems to act as a cell adhesion molecule. Recent studies have shown that in glioma cells, most of the soluble secreted APP occurs as a chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan (CSPG). In addition, full length APP CSPG has been detected in neuroblastoma and fibroblast cells as well as on the surface of glioma cells, and in human brain. These results suggest that the proteoglycan nature of the APP proteins may be important for their biological function.

Number:  687
UID:  8479521
Founded words:  ['associated']
Abstract:  Extracellular deposition of amyloid beta-protein (beta-AP), or A4 protein (M(r) 4,000), is associated with Alzheimer's disease and with Down's syndrome (trisomy for chromosome 21). The large membrane-bound precursor protein (APP) of beta-AP is normally cleaved within the beta-AP region by a putative proteinase (APP secretase) to release its extracellular portion; beta-AP is produced by an alternative proteolytic processing. Here we demonstrate that APP contains a proteinase inhibitor domain for the matrix metalloproteinase gelatinase A, which is located in the C-terminal glycosylated region of the secretory forms of APP. In addition, we show that the gelatinase has an APP secretase-like activity, which hydrolyses the Lys16-Leu17 bond in the beta-AP sequence. Our results indicate that the proteinase inhibitor domain of APP and gelatinase A may be involved in the formation of beta-AP.

Number:  688
UID:  1281162
Founded words:  ['associated']
Abstract:  Abnormal proteolytic processing of amyloid precursor protein (APP) is thought to be central to the formation and deposition of beta amyloid peptide in Alzheimer's disease. A putative "secretase" activity normally releases an amino-terminal APP fragment by cleaving APP at residues within the beta amyloid peptide thereby precluding amyloidogenesis. In order to better understand the requirements for APP cleavage by secretase, we have expressed a modified cDNA construct representing the 751-amino acid isoform of APP (APP-REP) and mutated APP-REP proteins in cultured cells. Here, we show that: (a) APP-REP is predominantly associated with membranes; (b) intracellular turnover and processing of APP-REP is similar to that reported for the intact APP protein; (c) secretion appears unaltered by introduction of the glutamate to glutamine mutation found in the APP gene of patients suffering from hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis of Dutch origin; (d) a mutation in which the 18 juxtamembranous amino acids encompassing the secretase site are deleted also allows release of an amino-terminal fragment into the conditioned medium; and (e) kinetics of cleavage of APP-REP and its mutated derivatives are similar. These results indicate that the secretory cleavage of the extracellular amino-terminal fragments of APP-REP can occur in the presence of different novel juxtamembranous amino acid sequences.

